Talk on statistics in the headlines Statistician Jeff Rosenthal is giving a public lecture highlighting the debate over the long-form census, the Ontario lottery insider win scandal and the rash of pedestrian deaths in Toronto. It will take place on Wednesday, Oct. 20, from 4 to 5:30 p.m. at the University of Toronto, in Room 2117 of Sidney Smith Hall at 100 St. George St.
"When I first heard about it, I said, 'Are you kidding?'" he recalled, adding that most statisticians are happy to remain out of the limelight.
He supports the proclamation, however, and thinks it is extremely timely given the controversy over the long-form census.
"The government made what I consider to be a wrong decision," he said, "but that doesn't take away from how important statistical ideas and analysis are. And I think despite this unfortunate decision by the government, it's appropriate to celebrate all the important successes and relevance of statistics."
Inspired by the census controversy, Rosenthal is giving a public lecture Wednesday on "Statistics in the Headlines" as part of a celebration launched by his university's statistics department.
He said the debate revealed an "anti-statistics" feeling among some Canadian politicians.
"There's a bit of a feeling that [if] statistics don't support the position that you were hoping for, it must be the fault of the statistics and the statisticians," he said. But at the same time, he was amazed by the amount of public reaction calling for the mandatory long-form census to be reinstated.
"I think it does speak to an awareness out there … that these statistical information and data actually are important to the way we run our society and the decisions that we make."
A UN website lists official national celebrations of World Statistics Day.
In Canada, they include the posting of short online videos about Statistics Canada for the general public, along with a coffee and cake event for Statistics Canada employees in Ottawa.
The event will feature a panel on Statistics Canada's contribution to the social and economic sectors and the importance of official statistics in a democratic society.