&amp;nbsp;&amp;nbsp; Industry Minister Tony Clement has defended the federal government's decision to scrap the mandatory long-form census. (Fred Chartrand/Canadian Press)Census: Should it be mandatory?The federal government has not backed down from its decision to scrap the mandatory long census form and replace it with a voluntary survey, despite protests from opposition parties, and scores of groups and associations representing many industries and interests.Industry Minister Tony Clement told a parliamentary committee Tuesday that the government has sought to find a "balance" between collecting data and respecting Canadians' privacy with its recent decision to scrap the mandatory long census form.We asked readers if the long-form census should be mandatory or voluntary. As of 4 p.m. ET on Wednesday, more than 14,000 votes were cast. A resounding 81 per cent of respondents felt the long-form census should be mandatory."I have serious issues with the motives of a government that refuses to gather meaningful statistics about the population of our country," wrote commenter Mesracines. "The mandatory census gives a voice to the people who require the services provided by the government including disability pensions, employment insurance, health care to name only a few."IseeDumbPeople agreed. "Science is a search for evidence and is not based on the principles of democracy. As such, it is not a quest for opinions. Government can decide whether or not to fund a scientific study, but it has absolutely no business influencing how the study should be done."Reader gerry atric felt the mandatory long-form census was an invasion of privacy. "It's only purpose is to gather as much information as possible to enable the government to intrude even more in Canadian's lives."Agatha1900 had no objection to being asked basic questions, such as the number of people in the household and their ages, but objected to "questions such as religion, ethnic origin, number of rooms in the house.""I don't know how answers to these types of questions are required for social programs," she wrote.A couple of readers suggested that the federal government provide financial incentives for filling out the long-form census. Commenter theSchwartz2u reckoned that "a promise of a $50 cheque would probably suffice to persuade most folks."Do you think the census questions intrude on individual privacy? Is it worth the intrusion to have reliable findings on the Canadian population? Let us know.A U.S. Army specialist talks with an Afghan villager during a patrol near COP Nolen, in Kandahar, Afghanistan. (Rodrigo Abd/Associated Press)WikiLeaks: Should war documents have been released?U.S. officials have condemned the release of thousands of secret military and intelligence reports about the war in Afghanistan by the website WikiLeaks.Thousands of documents released Sunday reveal new details about the war in Afghanistan, including the close relationship of the Pakistani military with Afghan insurgents.The documents were written by soldiers and intelligence officers, WikiLeaks said.We asked readers if they thought the Afghanistan war documents should have been released to the public? As of 4 p.m. ET on Wednesday, more than 1,800 votes had been cast. Nearly 70 per cent of respondents agreed that the war documents should have been released."The documents should be released since the citizens of this country and the [U.S.] and allies are the ones funding it," wrote DaveHamel. "If the people we are hoping to put in charge after we leave have close relations with the insurgents we need to know that."ChristopherHoare agreed. "Whistleblowers and others who leak information are the only people who safeguard the public's right to know the truth. The media have become spineless lapdogs."Many readers who were against the release of the documents expressed concern for the safety of the troops on the ground and the informants named in the documents."We have far [too] cavalier of an attitude in regards to the repercussions to people actually on the ground in Afghanistan, and I am nothing less then shocked that people feel that their right to read these documents on their iPhone at Starbucks is more of a fundamental right then protecting actual human lives on the ground," wrote Mark Winn.ScottAsh agreed, stating that, "releasing the documents only has the potential to put soldiers at MORE risk, NOT less (as well as Afghans working for NATO)."What do you think of the release? Does public interest override national security? Take our poll.BP CEO Tony Hayward testifies on Capitol Hill in Washington. (Alex Brandon/Associated Press)Tony Hayward: Should he step down?BP confirmed this week that CEO Tony Hayward will step down Oct. 1. Hayward has faced intense criticism of his handling of the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico.Last month, he testified before a congressional committee hearing in Washington about the explosion aboard the Deepwater Horizon rig that killed 11 workers on April 20 and the steady leak of oil that began two days later.Hayward will receive a $1.7-million payout and will also be entitled to draw an annual pension of $956,000 from a pension pot valued at around $17.5 million.We asked readers whether they thought Hayward should step down. As of 4 p.m. EST on Wednesday, more than 700 votes were cast, with 63 per cent agreeing that Hayward should step down."He should be sent to the Gulf for the cleanup," wrote KKSLui.Some readers defended Hayward."Tony Hayward was unfortunately just a scapegoat," wrote commenter sargant. "He himself was not responsible for the incident but the complete chain that report to him and the regulators plus the drill operators Transocean and Deepwater Horizon. But nope it will be too costly and risky to fire any of the multiple managers in the command chain ... Blame the most visible one and chop his head off."How do you think Hayward handled the oil spill? What does BP need to do to win back public confidence? Let us know.