n"&gt;Aug 3 (Reuters) - The following are top stories from
selected Canadian newspapers. Reuters has not verified these
stories and does not vouch for their accuracy.
THE GLOBE AND MAIL: - Canada's professional statisticians are stepping up the
fight to bring back the mandatory long-form census, even as the
government stands firm on its decision to scrap it. - As forest fires grew in British Columbia, officials in
the worst-affected area warned those in evacuation zones that
they could not guarantee they would rescue them if they refused
to leave their homes. - The spies of tomorrow need to be younger, better educated
and able to use rapidly evolving technology to meet the
challenges of the spy trade in the modern age, according to
documents obtained by The Globe and Mail. BUSINESS SECTION: - Research In Motion (RIM.TO) appears unwilling to weaken
its BlackBerry security features to appease the government of
the United Arab Emirates, even as a dispute between local
authorities and the smart-phone maker quickly turns into a
geopolitical struggle over who controls wireless communication. - Deep in the Gulf of Mexico, BP (BP.L) engineers are
preparing to throttle, once and for all, the disastrous oil
well known as Macondo. - Husky Energy (HSE.TO) has received the green light to
drill a pair of wells in another White Rose expansion oil field
off Newfoundland. The Canada-Newfoundland and Labrador Offshore
Petroleum Board approved the company's application Monday to
drill two wells. NATIONAL POST: - An outright acquittal in a criminal trial in Canada is a
lot less common than most people might think. A finding of "not
guilty" was the result in just more than 3 percent of the more
than 390,000 criminal cases in the country in 2008-2009,
according to data recently released by Statistics Canada. FINANCIAL POST: - Kinross Gold Corp (K.TO) said Monday it is acquiring Red
Back Mining Inc RBI.TO for US$7.1 billion, a deal that will
get the Toronto-based gold giant a big foothold in West Africa,
one of the fastest-growing gold-mining regions in the world. - Russia's worst drought in recorded history has sent wheat
prices surging, providing some relief to Canadian farmers who
have been dealing with weather issues of their own.