The Canadian Press
OTTAWA - Opposition parties say newly released documents prove the
Conservative government lied to Canadians about controversial changes
to the census.
Liberals and New Democrats say the documents show Statistics Canada
feared unreliable data would result from the government's decision to
replace the mandatory long-form census with a voluntary survey.
That's contrary to Industry Minister Tony Clement's claim that
StatsCan was comfortable with the change.
NDP Leader Jack Layton says Clement lied and should have been moved
out of his post during last week's cabinet shuffle.
Layton says he'll try to forge a common front among opposition leaders
to force the government to maintain the mandatory census while doing
away with the threat of jail time for those who refuse to fill it out.
The Federal Court, meanwhile, has agreed to fast-track the case of a
francophone group that's trying to block the government's planned
changes.
Papers released Tuesday revealed that the former head of StatsCan,
Munir Sheikh, advised that a voluntary survey would not be as useful
as the current mandatory form.
In a draft text of a planned July 21 speech to staff, Sheikh said a
voluntary survey would meet the needs of many users "but will not
provide useful data to meet the needs of other users of the mandatory
long-form census."
Sheikh resigned before delivering the speech.
"I think the documents that were revealed show . . . Mr. Clement was
not telling the truth to Canadians," Layton told a news conference
Wednesday.
"That's why I was surprised to see that he wasn't relieved of the
responsibility for the census in the recent cabinet shuffle."
Prime Minister Stephen Harper seems determined to scrap the long-form
census despite resounding opposition from provinces, municipalities,
business groups, religious groups, charities and social scientists
which rely on detailed census data to plan for the future.
Layton called Harper's stance "pig-headed."
And he lauded the Federation des communautes francophones et
acadiennes du Canada for "grabbing the tail of this beast and trying
to wrestle it to the ground."
The group is seeking an injunction to block what it considers an
unconstitutional change to the census. It argues that the mandatory
long-form census is critical to language rights and the provision of
French-language services.
Judge Roza Aronovitch agreed Wednesday that there is an urgency to
hearing the case, setting a hearing date for Sept. 27-28.
The Harper government has defended its decision to scrap the mandatory
survey, arguing that no one should face jail for refusing to answer
intrusive questions.
But Liberal MP Bob Rae called that argument a "red herring," noting
that no one has ever been jailed for failing to fill out the census.
He said the solution is simple: Keep the long-form census mandatory,
but drop the jail threat.
"There is no compliance issue. This has never been an issue for anyone
— except for a government that is ideologically bent on undermining
the trust Canadians have in government and is fundamentally
uninterested in the condition of the people," Rae said.
"In short, it's clear that for Stephen Harper, Canadians just don't
count."
Layton said the government is trying to justify its decision by
concocting a "ridiculous" scenario that "law enforcement officials are
going to come knocking on your door, complete with manacles, to throw
you in solitary confinement because you wouldn't answer a question
about the number of bedrooms in your house."
In reality, he said all opposition parties favour doing away with the
threat of imprisonment.
Bloc Quebecois Leader Gilles Duceppe has suggested imposing some other
type of sanction, such as removal of a person's passport or Employment
Insurance benefits.
Layton wasn't keen on withholding EI but said he'd consider other
ideas. He intends to speak with Liberal Leader Michael Ignatieff and
Duceppe to see if a common opposition front can be developed in time
for Parliament's resumption next month.
Layton pooh-poohed suggestions that a standoff over the census could
conceivably trigger defeat of Harper's minority government and a fall
election.
"The only people who would enjoy that experience would be the
cartoonists."
The Canadian Press, 2010
Click here to buy text ads on Breitbart
Show Comments / Post Comments