OTTAWA - The NDP is calling for an emergency debate on the Harper
government's controversial census changes.
Party leader Jack Layton sent a letter to the Speaker of the Commons
today asking for a debate on the "integrity of the census" when the
House resumes next month.
He made the call as the Commons industry committee met to discuss the
census issue.
The Conservatives have been facing heavy criticism since they
announced in July that they are making the long-form census voluntary.
They argue that the survey, which has been mandatory, is too
intrusive.
But experts say far fewer people will fill out a voluntary survey,
making its data unreliable.
"The ability to change the long form diminishes with each passing day,
as printing deadlines loom and preparations by Statistics Canada
proceed,” Layton wrote in his letter.
"At stake, of course, is the continuity and reliability of the
country’s historic data on which so many Canadians and their
institutions depend."
Last week, the government blinked in the face of a francophone group's
court challenge, but it's still refusing to bend on its overall plan
to scrap the mandatory long-form census.
Industry Minister Tony Clement announced last Wednesday that the
government will add three questions on language skills to the
obligatory short-form 2011 census. In the past, the questions have
been part of the long-form census.
Clement's move was aimed at short-circuiting a court challenge by
Federation des communautes francophones et acadiennes du Canada. The
group maintains that scrapping the mandatory nature of the long-form
census would violate the Charter of Rights and the Official Languages
Act.
Earlier Wednesday, the Federal Court agreed that the situation is
urgent and set a Sept. 27-28 hearing date for the federation's case.
Clement also announced that the government will introduce legislation
this fall to remove the threat of jail time for people who refuse to
fill out any mandatory federal survey.
Clement said the changes are as far as he's prepared to go to mollify
critics of the census changes.
All three opposition parties have been calling on the government to
eliminate the threat of jail time and reinstate the mandatory nature
of the long-form census.
The Canadian Press, 2010
Click here to buy text ads on Breitbart
Show Comments / Post Comments