Mainstream medical opinion is roundly skeptical of Paolo  Zamboni's "liberation" treatment for multiple sclerosis, but that's  not to say the Italian surgeon won't one day be vindicated. As many  have pointed out, nobody believed the Heliobacter pylori bacteria  caused stomach ulcers either -- but it does. It's possible  cerebrospinal venous insufficiency (CCSVI)-- the name Dr. Zamboni  gave to ostensibly constricted neck veins, which he relieves with  angioplasty, often to rave reviews -- will eventually be  acknowledged as a key piece of the MS puzzle. If so, Canadian politicians will be able to take some credit.  Alberta, Newfoundland and the federal government have all agreed to  spend money studying the treatment, and Saskatchewan plans full  clinical trials. If they were honest, though, some of those  politicians would admit they weren't entirely motivated by an  unquenchable thirst for medical truth. Liberal leader Michael Ignatieff, who promises to fund clinical  trials as prime minister, would be one. "Why can't Canadians get a  shot at getting at something that might have a therapeutic benefit?"  the erstwhile professor asked last month, seemingly opening the door  to everything from leech therapy to trepanation. Based on their  op-ed in Tuesday's Ottawa Citizen, Liberal health critic Ujjal  Dosanjh and MP Kirsty Duncan would be two more. I claim no  significant expertise on MS or CCSVI, but I know bad arguments when  I see them. Here's one: Mr. Dosanjh and Ms. Duncan claim that the "scientific  expert working group" on CCSVI, assembled by the Canadian Institutes  of Health Research, includes "no experts, no experience, and many  undeclared conflicts of interest." Pardon? That's 23 individuals they're impugning there. They include  respected neurologists from the Ottawa Hospital, the Cleveland  Clinic, St. Michael's Hospital in Toronto, NYU and the Universities  of Calgary, Wisconsin, Saskatchewan, British Columbia and Texas. So,  what are these conflicts of interest? CCSVI activists such as Ashton  Embry, a Calgary geologist, insinuate some working group members are  in the pocket of pharmaceutical companies, which profit from current  approaches to MS treatment. But that would be pretty strong stuff  for politicians to hurl at respected physicians -- so they don't.  They just drop the stink bomb and flee the scene. Moving on, Mr. Dosanjh and Ms. Duncan claim not to understand why  the government is dragging its heels on clinical trials when "87% to  90% of MS patients show one or more venous abnormalities in MRIs and  ultrasounds, and 97% when angioplasty is done." You'll find such  numbers on websites trying to sell liberation therapy tourism, but  if you consult more disinterested sources you'll see that findings  differ markedly. A randomized University at Buffalo study released  in February, for example, found that only 56.4% of MS sufferers had  CCSVI (and 22.4% of non-MS sufferers had it too). The Liberals like to portray themselves as the party of science and  reason and the Conservatives as the party of mulish right-wing  stupidity. On the mandatory long-form census, on crime prevention,  on climate change, on the importance of abortion for maternal health  in the developing world, they are comfortably in and of the  mainstream. "The government is slaughtering good medical practice on the altar  of ideology," MP Dr. Keith Martin complained when the Tories  insisted family planning had nothing to do with maternal health --  and he was right. On the MS file, however, the Liberals are way out  in left field. And we all know why: Because there's nothing in it,  politically, for them not to be. It took some flaming cheek for Mr. Dosanjh and Ms. Duncan to claim  that "disregarding experts is a dangerous precedent" in an op-ed  that involved disregarding -- not to mention disrespecting --  literally dozens of medical practitioners and researchers. But  precious few politicians are capable of resisting the lure of  emotionally charged issues, and the opportunities they afford to  care out loud. From this appalling cynicism, there seems very little  hope of liberation.