It could be that the long-form census debate has reached the point that we may have to trust the Harper government when it claims that it really is doing the right thing, and that Canadians - a silent majority, perhaps -- hate being asked intrusive questions about religion and ethnicity. In an attempt to move the story forward, journalists have been filing access-to-information requests, sleuthing for documents that shed light on the decision. The documents have produced some results. For instance, last week we told a story that challenged former industry minister Maxime Bernier's claim that he received thousands of emails from people opposed to the idea when he held the post back in 2006. According to the Statistics Canada documents, "we got a standard 25-30 (emails) a year." In responding to our story, Bernier now claims that much of the emails were destroyed. Is that explanation plausible? You'll have to judge that for yourself. Bernier also claimed that his government's decision to resort to a voluntary long-form census was based on "principle," not the number of complaints.Presumably, if the Tories were acting on principle, and if there was a genuine concern about the long-form census as far back as 2006, there would be evidence of some sort of discussion. Perhaps meetings with senior statisticians. Perhaps an examination of how other countries were balancing the desire for privacy and the need to collect essential data. Perhaps the commissioning of studies, examining the pros and cons. That was my thinking when I filed a request asking for studies that the government commissioned within Stats Canada examining various aspects of the census. Surely, a government would need evidence before making such a major decision. The response to my request for such studies was disappointing: "Having completed a thorough search, we regret to inform you that we were unable to locate any records responsive to your request." It could have been that the wording of my request was skewed. Or maybe the time period was incorrect. Or perhaps, as the response suggests, there were no studies. And that seems to make sense in light of a story that came from The Canadian Press earlier this week in which we learned that Statistics Canada ran a "$1-million test and had extensive consultations" a mere months before the government's decision." So instead of working on studies that examined the pros and cons of the long-form census based on anxiety that was expressed as far back as 2006, Statistics Canada was operating on the assumption that everything was fine. In connecting the dots, it would seem to confirm what has become part of the narrative. It was a decision based, not on policy, but politics, by a government willing to sacrifice the mandatory long-form census to appeal to its conservative base. Still, there must have been some discussion between Tony Clement, the minister responsible for Statistics Canada, and officials in his department? Unfortunately, we may never know because the most recent response I received for a request for those records was an outright refusal. Industry Canada used section 69(1)(e), which allows a government to exclude "records the purpose of which is to brief ministers of the Crown in relation to matters that are before, or are proposed to be brought before, Council or that are the subject of communications or discussions." In other words, if an email is sent to the minister and he discusses its contents with his colleagues around the cabinet table, then we're out of luck, and don't even have the right to complain to the Information Commissioner. Undaunted, I phoned the office any to ask about his maddening exclusion and was told that this is part of an unfortunate trend. Why? In large part because of a case that is before the Supreme Court of Canada, the subject of last week's blog post. In essence, if records reside in a minister's office (on his desk, computer hard drive, etc.) then journalists can't have it. Period. This exclusion has been described by the lawyers fighting the court case as a "black hole" in the Access to Information Law. And the fear, of course, is that governments will use this loophole to shield records by sending them upstairs to the minister's office where they remained sealed forever. Such is the importance of this loophole that the federal information commissioner and intervenors representing journalists, civil libertarians and media lawyers, are locked in battle with the federal government. Now it's up to Canada's high court to decide. In the meantime, the government appears to be using a loophole in the Access to Information Act to withhold information. So when Stephen Harper, Tony Clement, Maxime Bernier and other Conservative MPs say that Canadians hate the long-form census and want it gone, we may be unwittingly forced to do something that is counterintuitive: trust that the Conservatives really are doing the right thing.If you have any information you'd like to share, I can be reached at david_mckie@cbc.ca
Tags: access to information act, behind the numbers, census, david mckie, maxime bernier, supreme court of canada, The Canadian Press