OTTAWA - A million-dollar test run, privacy checks and extensive
consultations on the 2011 census were all in place only a month before
the Conservative government decided to scrap the long questionnaire
this spring.
Internal Statistics Canada documents shed light on just how abrupt the
decision was for the agency, which prepares for the census and
analyses the data over a period of seven years.
A key part of the preparation was a test of the census project in May
which cost the government more than $1 million. Long and short
questionnaires were sent to 110,000 homes in suburban Montreal, Quebec
City and Red Deer, Alta., on a voluntary basis, to test the mechanics
of the census process.
A privacy impact assessment was conducted and cleared with the privacy
commissioner a month later.
Consultations with federal departments on the questionnaire, and with
other interested parties, had been going on since 2007.
All this planning was discussed by senior StatsCan bureaucrats during
a high-level meeting with then-chief statistician Munir Sheikh in
March 2010.
Sheikh offered no indication at the time, only two months before the
axe would fall on the mandatory long-form census, that it would be
replaced with a voluntary national household survey. Details of the
meeting were among records obtained by The Canadian Press under the
Access to Information Act.
One timeline provided to civil servants at the meeting as part of a
PowerPoint presentation showed they expected the government to publish
the long and short census questionnaires in April or May.
Instead, cabinet waited until late June to publish only the short
questionnaire. A note on the Statistics Canada website, which was not
included in their daily news releases, indicated a voluntary survey
would take the place of the long form.
The National Statistics Council, which advises the chief statistician,
federal departments and even StatsCan staff were not formally informed
until two days later.
The Conservatives have said they made the change after hearing in 2006
from an unspecified number of Canadians who were angry with the
intrusiveness of the long form.
Industry Minister Tony Clement said the change was made once final
deadlines began approaching for the 2011 census.
"I'll take responsibility for not raising it on October 30, 2008 when
I was sworn in as industry minister. I can't reply to why it wasn't
raised before that date, but certainly I think one's mind gets
concentrated on this as you get closer to the census," Clement said
last week.
"We had a few other issues that were occupying my time before that,
like the world economic meltdown."
Liberal MP Carolyn Bennett, who is sponsoring a private member's bill
to reinstate the mandatory long-form census, said the Tories should
have consulted Canadians on the decision.
"If they believed the information was important and it was important
to have integrity in being able to compare the census data, they would
have redoubled their efforts in education, in consulting their
stakeholders, not just this ideologically driven unilateral move
catching all of the people who need the data off guard," said Bennett.
Printing of the 2011 short census and the national household survey
was scheduled to get underway last week.
— With files from Dean Beeby
The Canadian Press, 2010
Click here to buy text ads on Breitbart
Show Comments / Post Comments