Heather Scoffield, The Canadian Press
OTTAWA - NDP Leader Jack Layton wants an emergency parliamentary
debate on the cancellation of the mandatory long census, saying it's
not too late to reverse the government's decision.
"I think the case is compelling," Layton said in an interview.
"The issue is of an emergency nature, from a timeline standpoint. And
secondly, in terms of the substance and importance of it all, the
collection of this data has enormous significance."
It is up to the Speaker of the House of Commons to decide whether a
request for an emergency debate has merit.
While such a debate wouldn't necessarily change anything, it would
force the Conservatives to discuss their decision publicly, Layton
said.
"It's a way of putting additional pressure on an otherwise
intransigent government."
The Conservatives quietly decided in June to scrap the mandatory long
census and replace it with a voluntary version. They argued that the
long form probed too deeply into the private lives of Canadians and
threatened them with jail for refusing to answer the questions.
"Our approach is a very fair and reasonable one," Industry Minister
Tony Clement told the Commons on Monday. "We want to find a better
balance between gathering the necessary data and Canadians' right to
privacy."
But the move has been met with vigorous opposition from a wide array
of professional organizations, minority-rights advocates, provincial
and municipal governments as well as opposition politicians. They say
the replacement voluntary survey won't produce reliable results,
especially when it comes to understanding small communities and
minority populations.
Most recently, Bank of Canada Governor Mark Carney said the quality of
some of the bank's economic research would be hurt by the lack of
solid data.
The replacement voluntary survey has already been sent to the printers
and the civil servant in charge of the 2011 census has said it's too
late to bring back the mandatory form.
But former chief statistician Ivan Fellegi said Ottawa could postpone
the whole census to September 2011 from May, gaining a few extra
months to re-establish the long census.
Parliament could also decide to make the replacement household survey
mandatory instead of voluntary, Fellegi said.
Such a decision would probably require a legislative change, he added,
but it could be done through a private member's bill.
Fellegi, two former clerks of the Privy Council and  a former governor
of the Bank of Canada have written to Prime Minister Stephen Harper
urging restoration of the long form.
They said Statistics Canada's credibility has been undermined by the
government's handling of the issue.
They want legislators to entrench principles for the agency that would
ensure that all decisions on methodology are based on science, not
politics. They also want the chief statistician to be able to speak
freely about how the agency's data is used, without fear of
repercussions.
So far, the four mandarins have received no official response to their
letter, Fellegi said.
"The next step is up to Parliament, I guess."
The Tories have suggested that if users of the census data aren't
getting enough information, they could pay to have research done
themselves.
The Canadian Press, 2010
Click here to buy text ads on Breitbart
Show Comments / Post Comments