OTTAWA — The simmering controversy over the long-form census will leave the Harper government on a two-front defensive on Tuesday as its lawyers fend off a court challenge and MPs battle over an opposition resolution in Parliament.Liberal leader Michael Ignatieff on Monday highlighted his party’s plans to put the spotlight on the issue in an effort to convince the Conservative government to rethink its plans.“They want to stampede this through and we’re saying ‘Hold on here.’ You’re in a minority government, you don’t have the approval of Parliament: think again, and let’s get this right.”Meantime, an organization representing French-speaking Canadians is arguing in Federal Court that the Harper government is still violating its duties under the Official Languages Act, despite a language-based compromise on the decision to scrap the long-form census.The Federation des communautes francophones et acadienne du Canada is asking the court to restore the mandatory questionnaire as part of the 2011 census and reverse the government’s decision to turn it into a voluntary survey. It will also receive federal funding for its legal fees, up to a maximum of $85,000, through a program designed to support linguistic rights.After the government announced at the beginning of the summer that it would scrap the long-form census, Industry Minister Tony Clement signalled a compromise in August to add some new questions about written and spoken languages onto the mandatory short-form census. Rupert Baudais, who is representing the federation, told Justice Richard Boivin Monday that the government has a “duty” to protect and support the vitality of minority English and French-speaking communities across the country, but it cannot do this if it only has statistics that identify the number and location of minority communities.“This is not the only data that is necessary,” he argued. “To know just the number [of francophones] is not sufficient. It’s just one set of data among other [statistics] that is necessary.”The federation says federal institutions cannot develop or assess minority-community-focused programs without adequate data on employment, education or immigration status — all of which are included in the longer questionnaire.For his part, Mr. Ignatieff said Statistics Canada is a world-renowned institution and that the Harper government is “engaged in a form of vandalism.”“So let’s all just slow down, calm down and fix the census,” he said. “That’s the way to make Parliament work and pull this government back before it plunges ever further into needless folly.”On Tuesday, the Liberals are using their allotted “opposition day” to hold a debate in Parliament about the government’s decision in June to abolish the long-form census.Then that evening or on Wednesday, MPs will vote on a Liberal motion to keep the mandatory long-form census intact, while removing jail time as one of the potential penalties for non-compliance. That vote will carry no legal weight and the government can choose to ignore it, however, it could highlight the political divide over the issue in Parliament.Prime Minister Stephen Harper and his ministers have said the mandatory long-form census should become voluntary in order to strike a better balance between the need for information and citizens’ desire for privacy. But a strong backlash soon after the announcement came from social groups, municipalities and provinces, the business sector, academics and charities — all which have said they need the long-form registry. The head of Statistics Canada, Munir Sheikh, resigned in protest because he said a voluntary form will not be statistically valid.So far, there are no signs the government is about to change its mind. Mr. Clement has been defending the decision in the House of Commons in recent days, warning of how Statistics Canada has been intruding into the lives of Canadians. The 2011 census begins in May and forms are already being printed in preparation.Mr. Clement on Monday brushed aside criticism from the Liberals in the Commons. “We have been open, we have been reasonable, we have been honest,” he said. “We have tried to find a reasonable balance between the coercion that the opposition loves to enforce on Canadians, but getting the useful and usable data without having those threats of jail time and massive fines against our fellow Canadian citizens.”But during a break in the court hearing, Marie-France Kenny, the president of the federation, noted that she was still waiting for the government to respond to numerous requests since July to discuss the matter. “We had tried every other measure we could think of and we couldn’t get through to the government,” she said.Baudais also tabled documents that revealed nearly 40 federal institutions require the data for their operations and activities, and that senior experts at Statistics Canada had warned the government this summer that new results from the voluntary survey would not be reliable.Government lawyers are scheduled to present their arguments Tuesday. Liberal MP Carolyn Bennett is tabling a private member’s bill this fall to amend the Statistics Act to include the long-form census killed by the government.Ms. Bennett’s bill specifies that a long-form questionnaire must be administered with the regular census and the proposed amendments also include removing the existing threat of jail time for failing to answer the census. It would maintain the existing threat of a maximum fine of $500.It’s expected the Liberal bill would receive the support of other opposition parties, but it will take weeks — if not months — to wind its way through the parliamentary system.