Canadian census The long and short of the census over time
The British government is hoping that the next census, slated for 2011, will be the last of its kind in that country.
Francis Maude, the minister responsible for Britain's cabinet office, has said the traditional census is costly to carry out, with the results often incomplete and outdated by the time they are published.
The Office of National Statistics has been looking at census alternatives through its Beyond 2011 project.
"It is clear rapid changes in society and greater availability of alternative data about the population are leading to new requirements for population statistics," the Beyond 2011 website states.
"Data users want a greater range of statistics to be available more frequently, to provide an accurate picture of population change." European Union EU member nations are planning to hold a pan-European census in 2011, thanks to an EU regulation that was passed in 2008. Member countries are organizing censuses to be held that year, with the results to be ready by March 2014.
The 2011 EU-wide census will include questions about the age, gender, marital status and employment status of those in a given household, as well as questions about the size and density of that household.
Some EU member nations, like Germany and the Scandinavian countries, use a register-based census model, in which existing data is collected from administrative registries, such as municipalities and federal employment agencies. Collecting such data reduces the need to survey residents through interviews or questionnaires. Brazil Census field staff in Brazil will use these portable computers when they start enumerating households in August.  (Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics)While the United States struggle with moving census-taking methods into the computer age, Brazil is using two innovations in its 2010 census, slated to begin in August.
The Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics is equipping its enumerators with GPS-enabled portable computers that will transfer collected census data faster through a national network.
Brazilian residents can also answer census questionnaires online, through a special encrypted website.
About 58 million households will be surveyed in Brazil's census, which is held every 10 years. India In addition to carrying out its 15th national census in 2011, with surveys to be sent out about people and housing, India is also creating a National Population Register that will include, among other details, photographs and biometric information such as fingerprints and possibly iris information of everyone over the age of 15.