OTTAWA - The Conservative government has found a census consensus with
the new British government and some Republican activists in the United
States.
Within a week of the Canadian cabinet announcing that it would
eliminate the mandatory long-form census in favour of a voluntary
survey next year, the new Conservative government in the United
Kingdom is now poised to eliminate their census.
Some British politicians used the same words while they were in
opposition as Industry Minister Tony Clement, saying the mandatory
census was "intrusive" and coercive.
This weekend, the British government announced they would cut the
census to save money, and will depend instead on the use of private
data sources such as credit and mail records to put together
population statistics.
Canada is not going quite as far, keeping intact its mandatory short-
census form with its basic information on the number of people in a
household, their genders and mother tongues.
In the United States, opposition to the census among libertarians in
the Tea Party movement has been spurred by activists such as Texas
Congressman Ron Paul.
They became so vocal before this year's census, that some high profile
Republicans had to appeal to supporters to fill the papers out for
fear underreporting would hurt the assessment of voting districts for
Congress and state legislatures.
For Prime Minister Stephen Harper's Conservative government, it's one
of the rare times cabinet has unabashedly tipped its hat to the
libertarians that form part of its base of support. Harper himself
hails from the libertarian side of the Conservative party tent.
"All that the census is, and I say this as someone who once worked for
(Statistics) Canada, is an intrusion into the privacy of the
individual," writer Hugh Macintyre posted last week on the Freedom is
my Nationality and Western Standard blogs.
"So I applaud the government for at least taking this small step
towards ensuring greater privacy."
The decision has garnered aggressive opposition from a wide cross-
section of groups that use the data in decision making — from
municipalities, to academics and business organizations.
Some of those angry with the move will hold a major press conference
on Tuesday, to underline that the voluntary long survey will not
produce reliable results.
Still, there are some who have stood up to say they applaud the
decision based on the surveys being an unjustified government
intrusion into their personal lives.
"(Clement's) right. In the land of the free, having government ask
myriad questions about personal matters doesn't fly," Calgary-based
pundit Joan Crockatt wrote on Twitter.
Peter Coleman, president of the National Citizens Coalition, says the
government has simply not made a good case for why the census is
necessary.
"I'm not sure what the value is," said Coleman. "It's like one of
those old things you've done forever and ever and you keep on doing,
and somebody stops and says, "What are we getting out of this, how
much is it costing us, and what are we getting in terms of value of
this?"'
Other Canadian right-of-centre think tanks, including the Frontier
Centre for Public Policy and Macdonald-Laurier Institute, declined to
comment saying they had not yet studied the census issue.
Roger Gibbins, president of the Canada West Foundation, says he's
perplexed by the government's decision. He says he has not seen or
heard an identifiable, organized group in western Canada opposed to
the mandatory census, and doesn't completely understand why the
decision was made.
Clement has said no polling or consultation had been done on the
issue, but that "every MP" had heard complaints about the long census.
"People complain about flying saucers landing in their backyards and
wild raccoons and all sorts of things, so you have no idea if there's
a groundswell, or the intensity or frequency (of the complaints),"
said Gibbins.
Pollster Nik Nanos likened the census change to private member's bills
that address niche, "nuisance" issues.
"This initiative will unlikely have a material impact on ballot
support for any party. It's also unlikely to be of significant
interest to Conservatives compared to other core Tory issues like
taxes and the economy," Nanos said.
The cost of the change to the long census form could reach $30
million: $5 million to mail it to one-third instead of one-fifth of
households, and a potential $25 million to encourage non-responders to
fill it in.
The Canadian Press, 2010
Click here to buy text ads on Breitbart
Show Comments / Post Comments