Highest growth communities  Skyview Ranch in the northeast. Mahogany in the southeast. Sage Hill in the northwest. Walden in the southeast.  Shrinking communities  Sunalta in the southwest. Alyth/Bonnybrook in the southeast. Valleyfield in the southeast. Horizon in the northeast.
At the same time, 4,154 more people moved away from the city than settled in, giving Calgary its first negative net migration since 1992.
The northwest community of Panorama Hills saw the biggest influx for the third year in a row, gaining 1,455 new residents.
Calgary's vacancy rate has climbed to 3.93 per cent from 3.08 per cent in April 2009. There are now 16,929 vacant dwellings in the city.
The vast majority of Calgarians — 70.6 per cent — continue to own their own homes, with that figure dropping slightly from 2009. Federal census controversy Calgary's census results were released at the same time controversy is swirling over the federal government's decision that the long-form part of the 2011 federal census will no longer be mandatory because of privacy concerns.
The city will be deprived of information it needs for planning social services and infrastructure projects if Ottawa sticks to the change to the more comprehensive federal census, Broconnier said.
"It is not only age and demographic population. It is addressing those who are the most vulnerable in our society, dealing with issues around seniors. All of that information is collected," said the mayor. 'We won't have enough information to accurately plan our communities. We won't have enough information to understand who lives in our country anymore.'—Keith Brownsey, political scientist Ottawa is under mounting pressure to reverse the decision. On Wednesday, the head of Statistics Canada resigned in protest, telling Industry Minister Tony Clement that a voluntary survey cannot be as reliable as a mandatory one.
"We won't have enough information to accurately plan our communities. We won't have enough information to understand who lives in our country anymore," said Mount Royal University political scientist Keith Brownsey.
Calgary spends about $1 million per year on the civic census. Adding questions currently covered in the federal long-form census would raise the cost by five times, according to a city official.
"We do some basic information, but they collect more detailed information. We have nothing on immigration. We have nothing on ethnic populations," said Barbara Clifford, Calgary's returning officer.