Canada’s telecom regulator is starting to look like a neutered dog with no bite.Over the past five years, the federal Conservatives have already overruled the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission two times on major policy decisions — the speed of deregulating local phone markets and the Canadian ownership credentials of cellphone start-up Globalive.Now the Tories have laid down a veto on the issue of internet usage billing, forcing the regulator to cry uncle on Thursday and review the issue again. That makes three strikes against the CRTC. With it, they’ve thrown the power and the relevance of the regulator into doubt.Federal industry minister Tony Clement told the country the government would overturn the CRTC’s decision to end unlimited use internet plans Wednesday night. He did so not in the House of Commons but via his Twitter account. Mr. Clement further tweeted that he was “looking forward” to the testimony of CRTC chairman Konrad von Finckenstein before parliament’s industry committee to explain his rationale, thereby singling out an individual his government appointed. For some, that was the ultimate slap in the face for an agency that has been second-guessed one too many times.“It’s like a Kangaroo court — amateur night at the department of industry,” says Richard French, a former vice-chairman of the CRTC who now teaches at the University of Ottawa. He says the functioning federal system we once had, in which ministers have some degree of respect for the institutions and nominations of parliament, is disintegrating into a “Wild West atmosphere in which the most politically expedient path lies over the bodies of public servants trying to do their jobs.”Mr. French says the CRTC has expended considerable resources trying to come to a fair conclusion on this complicated issue. “If you were a serious person, would you want many hours and months of work reversed by a ministerial tweet in a fit of panic?”The government is within its legal rights, of course. The federal cabinet has the power to reverse a CRTC decision or to order further review. The question for many observers now is whether it is doing so fairly and consistently given the public and private guidance it has given to the regulator over the past five years.Mr. French says the government told the CRTC in 2006 to be more attentive to market forces and to back off the heavy-handed regulation of the incumbent phone companies. Through a ministerial directive issued by former industry minister Maxime Bernier, the government set the principles intended to govern all its subsequent decisions. He says the CRTC is applying that ministerial directive now in its internet usage decision and that in challenging it, the government’s philosophical inconsistency is troubling.Richard Schultz, a political scientist at McGill University, says Mr. Bernier did it the right way by issuing a clear ministerial directive in the phone deregulation case. Mr. Clement is doing it the wrong way by providing no reasons for the subsequent Globalive decision and little clarity now on internet policy. What the government is doing is hiding behind its veto power, “scoring political points, undermining the regulatory agency,” Mr. Schultz says. “They think they can get away and do these things without having to articulate public policy.”Mr. Schultz and others says the Harper government has an “anti-bureaucrat” approach to governing. It fired Linda Keene as president of the Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission. More recently, it battled Munir Sheikh, the head of Statistics Canada, over the government’s decision to scrap the mandatory long-form census.Mr. Sheikh resigned. Mr. von Finckenstein is said to have a thick skin but there are those in Ottawa wondering if he will too.“They don’t trust” these public servants, Mr. Schultz said of the Harper Conservatives. “And even though they put von Finckenstein in there, they still think the bureaucracy just has too much power.”That the government is taking the side now of internet users who want unlimited download privileges shouldn’t be particularly surprising, says Iain Grant of telecom consultancy the SeaBoard Group. An election looms.“[The Prime Minister] has to be acutely sensitive to the ability to make a popular move, with the usual bad guys taking the fall being [incumbent] telephone and cable companies.” Mr. Grant says the fact that the government has altered the CRTC’s position several times over the past last few years is not unusual given the communications industry is so fast-changing. Maybe that’s true. But Mr. von Finckenstein still comes out looking like the chairman of a regulator without much purpose. When his term is up and he leaves one year from now, he may simply be thankful it’s over.Financial Post