n"&gt;Oct 1 (Reuters) - The following are top stories from
selected Canadian newspapers. Reuters has not verified these
stories and does not vouch for their accuracy.
THE GLOBE AND MAIL: - The bureau and the Canadian Real Estate Association
(CREA) reached a tentative agreement that will allow sellers to
hire an agent to post their property on the all-important
Multiple Listing Service and then conduct the rest of the sale
on their own, if they choose. - Some of the world's most
powerful countries have joined the battle over Ontario's green
energy plan, threatening the cornerstone of Premier Dalton
McGuinty's renewable power strategy. The United States and the European Union emerged on
Thursday as latest countries to say they have key commercial
interests at stake and want to join the consultations on a
complaint by Japan to the World Trade Organization. BUSINESS SECTION: - Insiders of Potash Corp of Saskatchewan Inc (POT.TO) will
earn one of the largest windfalls from any takeover in recent
Canadian history if the company is sold, according to a
detailed analysis by The Globe and Mail of company documents. - The housing sector that helped pull Canada out of the
recession now threatens to derail the recovery, as a slowdown
in sales and construction act as a drag on economic growth. The economy contracted for the first time in almost two
years in July, and the formerly red-hot housing sector was a
key contributor. And with Canadian consumer debt at all-time highs, even a
modest slip in prices could have large consequences for the
broader economy as cash strapped consumers rein in their
spending. NATIONAL POST: - Toy manufacturing giant Mattel Inc (MAT.O) is voluntarily
recalling nearly 11 million products in the U.S. and Canada,
according to the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission and
Health Canada. The recall includes several models of toddler tricycles,
high chairs, inflatable balls and toy cars. - A Toronto Liberal
MP, Carolyn Bennett, wants to fast-track through Parliament her
private member's bill to bring back the mandatory long-form
census before the voluntary survey is mailed to Canadian
households next spring. Bennett introduced the bill in the House Thursday, a day
after the opposition parties passed a motion to reinstate the
mandatory long-form census. FINANCIAL POST: - In a development that could drastically change the way
Canadians buy and sell their homes, the real estate industry
has reached a landmark agreement with federal competition
authorities. The legally binding deal will allow for home sellers to pay
for only those services they want from their real estate
agents. Previously, under the rules established by the Canadian
Real Estate Association, consumers had to opt for an entire
slate of services, a practice the Competition Bureau deemed
anticompetitive.