OTTAWA - Federal civil servants won't get to fill out a workplace
survey because the Conservative government has axed it.
It appears the next Public Service Employee Survey has wound up in the
Treasury Board's budgetary crosshairs.
A Statistics Canada official broke the news to colleagues last month
in an email obtained by The Canadian Press.
"I regret to inform you that plans for the 2010 Public Service
Employee Survey are cancelled," Geoff Bowlby, head of the agency's
labour statistics division, wrote on June 2.
"We received notice from Treasury Board secretariat yesterday evening
that funding for the project was not approved for this year.
"Please cancel any work that you may have already initiated on this
project."
Neither Treasury Board President Stockwell Day nor his department were
immediately able to say how much the survey cost.
The government solicits voluntary feedback from its workers every
three years to improve programs and services. The survey gives a
snapshot of workers' demographics, skills, career expectations and
concerns.
The union that represents civil servants accused the Tories of turning
a deaf ear to the bureaucracy.
"In eliminating this survey, I think government is quite clearly
saying to their workforce that they're not interested," said Patty
Ducharme, executive vice-president of the Public Service Alliance of
Canada.
"They're not interested in hearing their ideas, they're not interested
in hearing what's actually going on in the workplace.
"Let's face it: the people who deliver the services every day to
Canadians from coast to coast to coast are the people who are more
likely to have good ideas and suggestions for improving services."
Statistics Canada conducts the survey and compiles the results. The
first survey was done in 1999; the most recent was in 2008.
Government workers have filled out the survey online for the last six
years. Workers without Internet access get paper copies.
About 258,000 workers received the last survey. About 170,000, or
about  two-thirds, filled it out.
The last survey turned up thousands of claims of harassment and
discrimination.
More than 27,000 workers, or 16 per cent of respondents, claimed they
had been harassed once or twice in the last two years. And 20,000
workers, or 12 per cent, claimed they had been harassed more than
twice.
Co-workers and bosses were mostly blamed.
Another 30,000 workers, or 18 per cent of respondents, alleged
discrimination, mostly based on gender, age and ethnicity.
Word of this survey being scrapped comes as the Tories are under fire
for getting rid of the mandatory, long-form census.
The head of Statistics Canada quit last week after Industry Minister
Tony Clement claimed the agency supported replacing the long-form
census with a voluntary survey.
It did not.
Clement has since clarified that the decision to scrap the census was
made by the federal cabinet alone.
Many groups oppose that decision.They say data will be less accurate
if the survey is voluntary instead of mandatory because fewer people
will fill it out.
Union executive Ducharme has similar concerns about cutting the
public-service survey.
"In the short term, it'll be a little blip in the picture," she said.
"But in the longer term, for improving the work environment, for
ensuring that managers are well trained to manage, that programs have
the resources to deliver the programs that they're supposed to and
that government plans for that, I think ... it will have a potentially
negative impact."
The Conservatives have clashed with the bureaucracy since coming to
power.
Theformer heads of the RCMP Public Complaints Commission, the Military
Police Complaints Commission and the Nuclear Safety Commission were
all turfed after running afoul of the Tories.
A former Public Works adviser won a $1.3 million settlement last week
after he was fired over a news report that turned out to be wrong. The
Conservatives let him go even though an internal probe exonerated him.
The Canadian Press, 2010
Click here to buy text ads on Breitbart
Show Comments / Post Comments