Adisappointed Stephen Harper boarded his campaign jet in  Calgary two years ago today bound for Ottawa as a re-elected Prime  Minister with 37.1% of the vote and another minority mandate. He'd insisted throughout the campaign there'd be no recession. He  promised there'd be no federal deficit. Little did he know, as the  Boeing 737 climbed through symbolically dark clouds, how the  oncoming economic storm and overcoming it with giddy deficit  spending would salvage his second term. Today, the Conservative government has emerged from a  still-smoldering recession just a half-point lower in the polls with  36.6% voter support, according to this week's Nanos poll figures. Flatlined enthusiasm is an incredible Tory feat in itself, even  with the 5% uptick in Liberal support since their electoral  meltdown. Nothing focuses voter minds on dumping incumbents faster  than pink slips and plant closures, yet the economic malaise in fact  saved Stephen Harper from that traditional fate. But the proof of how a bored Prime Minister might've squandered his  mandate without a recession to strangle was his misguided attack on  opposition parties just eight weeks after the Oct. 14 vote, and his  scheme to end public party financing. With the recession-fighting mindset easing, he's been at it again  -- filling the void of serious political action with idle  distractions like ending the mandatory long-form census and whipping  up the long-gun registry into a national frenzy. Had there not been a recession to fill out the thin agenda he'd  called an election platform, there's no telling what trouble Mr.  Harper could've made for himself over the last two years. Look, there can be no argument that the fall of 2008 was the wrong  time to experiment with coalitions under the shared power  arrangements negotiated by Liberal leader Stephane Dion.  Conservatives offered and delivered a steady hand to guide Canada  through turbulent times. But had the government been limited to its campaign promises, they  would've faced a vacuous order paper built on recycled law and order  initiatives, reannounced tax cut measures and a couple billion for  strategic defence initiatives, innovation and support for struggling  one-industry towns. Thanks to international agreements on the need for massive stimulus  spending, Mr. Harper had political cover to launch drunken-sailor  spending. His government paved every pothole and cut every ribbon,  all marked by thousands of look-at-us signs promoting its Economic  Action Plan. Yet as a minority mandate to deliver Conservative change, the last  two years have been a major bust. Mr. Harper has disappointed party puritans and made many enemies  when straying from the economic file. Senate reform has given way to senatorial stuffing, with Mr.  Harper's 2009 appointments setting a single-year record. The  bureaucracy has bulged, the balanced budget been delayed and there's  a hard-sell, single-source jet fighter contract on the horizon. Academics, cities and provinces have been outraged by his  census-altering shenanigans. His reckless spending on the G8/G20  summits was gobsmackingly profligate for the alleged party of  prudence. Injured veterans are at war against a government that  prided itself on being military-friendly. Environmentalists, as  usual, feel shunned by climate change inaction. Their government hasn't shrunk, ministerial accountability has been  selectively enforced, parliamentary decorum is still toxic and our  status in the world, if this week's United Nations smackdown means  anything, is soiled. Had this been done by a Liberal government, they'd be burning  Liberal leader Michael Ignatieff in effigy on Calgary's Stephen  Avenue Mall. Yet the fact we're treading water economically while so many other  nations are sinking with a soggy life preserver is the big Canadian  political picture that outweighs all other considerations to the  average voter. The recession saved Stephen Harper from his own trivial pursuits.  Perhaps he should be wary of the recovery.