OTTAWA — It was the year Canadians learned the meaning of an odd word — prorogation — and many decided they didn’t like how their prime minister had thwarted democracy by shutting down Parliament.It was also a year of both celebration and trauma for the national psyche: Sidney Crosby scored the game-winning gold medal goal in overtime to cap off Canada’s unifying Olympic experience in Vancouver. Four months later, at the G20 summit in Toronto, rioters burned cars and smashed storefronts, setting off a sweeping police crackdown that alarmed civil rights activists.In Ottawa, where the political parties remained deadlocked in a slow battle for public favour, the political scandals amounted to not much more than fiascos. Federal cabinet minister Helena Guergis was booted from her job and exiled from her own party — only to never learn the reason why. In the dead of summer, Statistics Canada’s Munir Sheikh resigned after his agency was forced by the government to cancel its mandatory “long-form” census.In the provinces, many premiers were either exiting the stage (just one of them, Newfoundland’s Danny Williams, on his own terms) or were trailing in the polls and gazing nervously at what lies ahead for them.And at the municipal level, voters in major cities were opting for change — electing brand new councils and, in the case of Toronto, putting conservative populist Rob Ford into the mayor’s chair.This was 2010: A year of both political paralysis and upheaval.Politicians on Parliament Hill worked in a nasty environment where civility disappeared long ago. All the while, little progress was made on the big issues that concern Canadians — health care, pension reform, global warming.Through it all, Prime Minister Stephen Harper remained focused on branding his governing party on two issues: a law-and-order crackdown, and solid economic management.By the end of the year, public opinion polls by Ipsos Reid were showing Canadians gave Harper solid marks in those two areas, although his record on health care and pensions was less impressive.Ipsos Reid president Darrell Bricker says he believes 2010 will go down in the history books as the year Canadians did not follow the lead of their American neighbours.“The political and social and economic turmoil that has absolutely polluted the country south of the border — the elephant next to our mouse — didn’t come over here.”In the U.S., Americans rejected the president who once gave them so much hope and conservatives turned to a new political option, the Tea party, as an alternative to the Republicans. About 80 per cent Americans lacked faith in their economy, which was struggling with crushingly high unemployment rates.But here in Canada, unemployment was lower, nearly two-thirds of Canadians believed the economy was on the right track after the recession of 2009, and Harper’s public popularity numbers didn’t take a hit.“In spite of all this continentalism that people are claiming exists, it’s just not happening,” said Mr. Bricker. “This represent a significant watershed. The fact that Canada didn’t go to the same place as the U.S.”Mr. Harper entered the year having committed a political miscalculation. On Dec. 30, 2009, he had telephoned Gov. Gen. Michaelle Jean to request that Parliament be prorogued. She granted the request. Instead of returning to the Commons Jan. 25, MPs would not return to their desks until March 3. Critics said the move had the effect of “padlocking” Parliament, killing more than 30 bills, and of denying opposition parties the chance to grill Harper in question period.Mr. Harper said he needed time to “recalibrate” his government’s agenda. Many Canadians weren’t buying it. They believed Mr. Harper was merely shutting down Parliament to prevent a Commons committee from investigating Canada’s handling of Afghan detainees. Public opposition began to grow.And then, on Jan. 12, the unexpected happened. Haiti was struck by a devastating earthquake, leaving thousands dead and many more homeless. For weeks, this became the only story that really mattered. The Harper government won plaudits for its response, sending the Canadian military to the Caribbean island to assist, and also by committing millions in aid.The next time Canadians saw much of Harper was when he was attending the Vancouver Olympics, a two-week event which became a success story for Canadian athletes and the organizers of the games. It was a good time to be a Canadian.By the time Parliament returned with a throne speech, Canadians witnessed one of the fastest policy reversals in recent memory. Mr. Harper dropped a plan to consider changing the national anthem’s lyrics to make them “gender neutral.” The federal budget, delivered in early March, was also forgotten quickly. It mapped a new course of fiscal austerity by promising to find $17.6 billion in savings over five years through measures such as freezing departmental budgets, slowing the growth of military spending and capping foreign aid.But politics on the Hill was about to be absorbed by something else: The troubles of a political power couple. It began with a media report about former Tory MP Rahim Jaffer’s business dealings with a Toronto businessman, extended into whether he was using his political connections to secure government financing, and ultimately swept his wife, Guergis, into the affair. Harper fired her after a private investigator came forward with information, but the rationale for his action has never been publicized and both Guergis and Jaffer have been cleared by an RCMP investigation. Eventually, the story fizzled. Her year ended happily, with the Dec. 15 birth of the couple’s first child.As summer approached, Harper prepared to host international leaders at twin summits, the G8, in Huntsville, Ont., and the G20, in downtown Toronto. Reports emerged of a whopping security bill exceeding $1 billion, and government insiders feared that substantial progress at the meetings would be overshadowed by questions of cost. Instead, the lasting image was one of violence — from the black-masked protesters who roamed through Toronto’s streets, to the army of police in riot gear that swooped in to arrest hundreds of people, many of who were later released without facing any charges. The implications were profound. Canadians were not accustomed to seeing this on their streets and questions will linger for years about whether police and governments bungled.In July, Industry Minister Tony Clement was on the hot seat. He had instructed Statistics Canada to end the mandatory long-form census. Politicians, academics, business groups, charities, premiers and researchers complained the validity of the census was endangered. But Clement, insisting the form was an intrusion of Canadians’ privacy, stuck to his guns — even after Sheikh resigned in protest. But by autumn, the controversy was fading.Parliament resumed Sept. 22 and Liberal leader Michael Ignatieff, fresh off a summer-long bus tour of the country, was energized (although his popularity didn’t last long in the polls).A new Governor General, university academic David Johnston, took office on Oct. 1 promising to place an emphasis on education.In the Commons, MPs voted down attempt by the Tories to kill the long-gun registry, and Jack Layton’s NDP (which had been divided on the issue) emerged politically wounded from the episode.Defence Minister Peter MacKay was on the defensive over a $16-billion plan to purchase new military F-35 jets. Harper came under fire from some quarters — but not the Liberals — for deciding to keep nearly 1,000 military trainers in Afghanistan for three years beyond the July, 2011 end of the combat mission.Meanwhile, the Tories — who often boast of Canada being open for private investment — blocked the acquisition of Saskatchewan’s Potash Corp. by BHP Billiton Ltd., of Australia.None of the criticism seemed to stick to the Conservatives. The year ended as it began, with talk of a looming election that neither Harper or Ignatieff say they necessarily want — but with everyone preparing for battle.