OTTAWA - Ontario and Quebec have launched a formal complaint against
the federal government’s decision to axe the long-form census, calling
the move a “mistake” that will have serious consequences.
Cabinet ministers from both provinces have written to federal Industry
Minister Tony Clement, requesting he reinstate the long census survey
“as soon as possible.”
The two-page letter dated September 27, obtained by The Canadian
Press, argues forcefully that the census decision will hamper
provincial support for education, innovation and economic development.
The lack of data from the census long form will also further impair
labour mobility and governments’ understanding of the country’s labour
market, the ministers said.
The letter is signed by Ontario Minister of Training John Milloy,
Quebec Education Minister Line Beauchamp, and Quebec Employment
Minister Julie Boulet.
Some provinces spoke out against the federal government’s census move
during the summer, but the formal complaint from Ontario and Quebec
escalates their opposition.
“We believe that the decision by the federal government to eliminate
the census long form was a mistake and that it will impact negatively
on the provision of services to the people of our provinces,” it says.
“We therefore urge you to reverse this course of action as soon as
possible.”
The federal Conservatives have been on the hot seat all week over
their move last June to eliminate the mandatory long census and
replace it with a voluntary survey.
The three opposition parties backed a motion Tuesday to revive the
mandatory long-form census. The Liberal motion, scheduled for a vote
Wednesday afternoon, was demanding the return of the mandatory long
questionnaire, minus the threat of jail time.
But Clement has said plainly that his government will not respond to
the motion if it passes the Commons.
Clement said Tuesday that the decision to replace the census with a
voluntary survey, mailed to more households, was a way to strike a
balance between the privacy rights of Canadians and the need for the
information by government policymakers and outside groups.
"Let me put this question ... to any member of the Liberal-Bloc or NDP
coalition partners: If someone in one of your ridings does not want to
complete the 40 pages of personal, private questions ... is it the
appropriate government response to harass them until they relent and
comply?" Clement said in the Commons.
Clement and other Conservative colleagues raised points during the
debate that have been contradicted in other arenas or do not match
public information.
"It's absurd to put honest citizens in prison when they refuse to say
how many bedrooms they have and I even dare to say what kind of cereal
they eat in the morning," Quebec Tory Steven Blaney said.
Previous censuses have not included a question on breakfast cereals —
nor the number of bathrooms in a house or what somebody is reading,
two other questions Conservatives have publicly fumed about.
Clement stated that some census workers were hired to work in their
own neighbourhoods, "meaning that your neighbour can know some of your
most personal and intimate information."
But the Office of the Privacy Commissioner has said Statistics Canada
brought in a series of changes nearly 20 years ago to ensure census
workers worked outside their neighbourhoods. Census documents also
offer respondents the option of mailing back their forms or else
asking for a different census representative if they're not
comfortable with who comes to their door.
A spokesman for Clement later said the information the minister was
referring to was relayed to Conservative MPs from constituents over
the summer.
Saskatchewan MP Lynne Yelich, minister of state for western economic
development, during the debate raised the case of a woman in her
province, Sandra Finley, who is being prosecuted for failing to fill
out the 2006 census.
In fact, Finley's opposition to the census was not related to the
intrusiveness of the questions, but the fact Statistics Canada had
purchased technology from defence manufacturer Lockheed Martin. She
told The Canadian Press in July she was not satisfied with the steps
taken by the Conservatives.
The census issue was also being debated a few streets over on Tuesday
inside a Federal Court hearing, where the Federation of Francophone
and Acadian Communities is arguing the elimination of the long census
will violate provisions of the Official Languages Act. It is asking
the court to bring back the mandatory long-form questionnaire as soon
as possible.
The federal government made its case to Justice Richard Boivin on
Tuesday that nothing in the act directs the government to use census
data as it works to nurture official language minority communities in
Canada. It also argued that there is no evidence the new voluntary
survey won't provide usable data.
The court has heard that Statistics Canada cannot make changes to the
2011 census process past the middle of next week, because of a
complicated administrative schedule.
Bennett also has a private member's bill to bring back the mandatory
long form that is expected to hit the Commons by mid-October. She
argues the government would have a hard time blocking the bill because
it would actually save money to reinstate the long form.
The Canadian Press, 2010
Click here to buy text ads on Breitbart
Show Comments / Post Comments