August 11, 2009
Categories:
Barack Obama
Orly Taitz — not just a birther!
Esquire's John Richardson tagged along with birther leader Orly Taitz and some of her followers in Kentucky&amp;nbsp;&amp;mdash; quite the spectacle:
We set off in a flotilla of cars. When we got to the state office complex an hour later, it took less than ten minutes for us to get badges and pass through security. A man named George Wilding, the manager of Kentucky's Public Corruption Unit, led us to a conference room. A few minutes later, we were joined by Bob Foster, Kentucky's Commissioner of Criminal Investigations.
Then Taitz began to talk, and she did not stop for 15 solid minutes: Obama forged this and his campaign forged that and these are his false addresses and here's something very strange that Justice Scalia told her at a book signing and here are the 500,000 signatures collected by WorldNetDaily magazine demanding an investigation ...
Finally Wilding held up a hand. &amp;quot;Let me just stop you right there. What applies to Kentucky?&amp;quot;
One of the citizens starts showing him documents. &amp;quot;This is clearly his school record that shows that he was a citizen of Indonesia ...&amp;quot;
&amp;quot;I don't understand what that has to do with the Kentucky attorney general's office,&amp;quot; Wilding repeated.
&amp;quot;He was on the ballot here in Kentucky,&amp;quot; Taitz said.
&amp;quot;That was a federal election. There are federal-election laws. The FBI investigates those. So I believe that your best venue and jurisdiction lies with the U.S. district court and the FBI.&amp;quot;
That's when Taitz lost it. &amp;quot;I can see that you are hell-bent on doing absolutely nothing,&amp;quot; she said, eyes flaring. &amp;quot;You want to pass the buck.&amp;quot;
&amp;quot;No ma'am. I'm trying to follow the law.&amp;quot;
&amp;quot;I'm going to the FBI and not only reporting Obama, I'm going to report you for refusing to investigate crimes. You have a duty to investigate those crimes! Why are people paying salary for this whole office of attorney general of Kentucky? To do nothing?&amp;quot;
&amp;quot;I think we're finished,&amp;quot; Foster said.
But Taitz wasn't finished. She marched her troops straight over to the secretary of state's office and did the exact same presentation all over again. Then she headed to the FBI to do it a third time. And the whole time, she never stopped talking:
Goldman Sachs runs the treasury.
Obama is a puppet.
There's a cemetery somewhere in Arizona where they just dug 30,000 fresh graves, which wait now for the revolution.
Baxter International &amp;mdash; a major Obama contributor &amp;mdash; developed a vaccine for bird flu that actually kills people.
Google Congressman Alcee Hastings and House Bill 684 and you'll see that they're planning at least six civilian labor camps.
Google an article in the San Francisco Chronicle about train cars with shackles.
The communist dictator Hugo Chavez way back in 2004 purchased the Sequoia software that runs our voting machines and the mainstream media won't report any of it &amp;mdash; not even Fox because Saudi Arabia bought a percentage of Fox in 2007.
This is the stuff that the media never gives Taitz a chance to say because it's so focused on the news hook of the &amp;quot;birther&amp;quot; issue. (And, believe me, this has been merely a tiny sample of what I saw on my road trip this spring.)
&amp;nbsp;