OTTAWA — Opposition parties vowed Wednesday to bring the census controversy to the floor of the House of Commons when Parliament resumes in mid-September — in the form of an emergency debate, a motion or even proposed legislation — in an attempt to overturn the Conservative government’s decision to scrap the long-form census.Liberal deputy Leader Rae and NDP Leader Layton both held news conferences to blast Prime Minister Stephen Harper’s government over the ongoing census controversy, and both accused Industry Minister Tony Clement of being untruthful, though they didn’t explicitly call him a liar.Mr. Rae said the Liberal party plans to present a motion to the Commons suggesting the jail time penalty for not filling out the census be removed from law and that the mandatory long-form census be reinstated. But Mr. Layton went further, saying the opposition parties should band together to pass a bill.“Certainly nobody wants to see anybody go to jail, and this is a ridiculous proposition that could easily be changed,” Mr. Layton said. “And in fact I’m going to propose that we seek unanimous consent of the House the moment we get back.“That can be done almost instantly, to pass a bill to fix that problem in three readings, just like that. We’ll see then what the Senate does with it, maybe it’s the Senate that wants to keep the straw man of jail alive, who knows.”Mr. Layton said he plans to be in touch with Liberal Leader Michael Ignatieff and Bloc Quebecois Leader Gilles Duceppe to try and find a “common approach” on how the House of Commons can deal with the census.Mr. Rae and Mr. Layton said the data gleaned from the long and short census questionnaires are vital for public policy, but neither seemed keen on triggering an election over the issue.“I’m hoping we don’t end up in such a predicament,” Mr. Layton said, adding that Canadians would be scratching their heads wondering why an expensive election would be held over Mr. Harper’s decision on the census and his unwillingness to work with the opposition parties to revise it.“I think it’s something that should be so easily resolved, if there were a will to do that you wouldn’t need to be having an election about a census,” Mr. Layton said.The opposition is claiming that the government’s decision to scrap the long-form census and to replace it with a voluntary survey reflects the ideological underpinnings of the Conservative government.Mr. Rae said it shows that the government isn’t concerned about the living conditions of Canadians, homelessness, housing, public institutions such as universities and hospitals and other public services.“If they did care, they would not consider doing this for one picosecond,”he told reporters.Mr. Layton suggested Mr. Harper really cancelled the detailed questionnaire because the prime minister is worried its results would show growing inequality and poverty in Canada and that he doesn’t want to face those facts.“Mr. Harper doesn’t believe in government action so he would prefer not to see the facts about what’s going on in Canada,” the NDP leader said. “I think that’s the more sinister dimension of this pigheaded approach they’re taking.”The government on Tuesday released documents that had been requested by the Commons industry committee which held a special hearing on the census controversy on July 27.Mr. Rae said they show Statistics Canada was not on board with the government’s decision, contrary to what Mr. Clement had implied when quoted in the media.“We do have a basis to say that when Mr. Clement told us what he told us last month, he wasn’t telling us the truth and Idon’t know how he can say that it’s the truth when there isn’t a soul in Statistics Canada who thinks that what he’s doing is statistically valid.”