Canada's government, apparently having nothing better to do, declared war on the census last month.
The Canadian census has had a long and relatively uneventful history. For just over a century, Canadians have been required to fill out a form requesting basic personal information once every five years. One in five Canadians, selected at random, must complete a "long-form census" which includes a broader range of questions.
The results of the long-form census have been used in some interesting and important ways: it has helped social activists track poverty in urban areas, school boards choose which schools to launch breakfast programs in and restaurant chains to decide where to open new stores--it's even helped condo developers figure out how many bedrooms to install in their units.
But that didn't stop the Canadian government, presently run by a reasonable facsimile of Newt Gingrich and staffed by at least one cabinet member who believes humans walked with the dinosaurs roughly 6,000 years ago, from abruptly deciding to scrap the mandatory long-form census and replace it with a voluntary survey.
To justify the move, government ministers went on a cross-country fearmongering campaign. In an attempt at channeling Michele Bachmann, Industry Minister Tony Clement declared that people have a "right to be free from the prying eyes of big government." Treasury Board head Stockwell Day compared the census to the Holocaust, asking whether it's right that the government can ask someone "whether she is a Jew or not? Don't you find that one even a little bit chilling?"
This is lunacy, plain and simple.
But Mr. Day and his government's irrational decision to axe the census isn't the real problem--even if the feds succeed, individual provincial governments will likely clean up the mess by instituting their own local censuses.
To get to the real problem, we need to look at the reason why the federal government decided to take hatchet to the census: because it had nothing better to do.
In Canada, federal politics is becoming an oxymoron. For the past quarter-century, our leaders have systematically hollowed out our central government, first in the name of provincial rights, then in the name of cutting the deficit--or, rather, passing the deficit off to the provinces.
The result is an American Tea Partier's dream: an empty shell of a national government whose sole preoccupation seems to be ridding itself of whatever few assorted responsibilities it has left, so that federal legislators can devote their full attention to more pressing matters, such as ensuring they can secure the Hill Times' nod as "Best Dressed" or "Sexiest" lawmaker.
We're now at the point where even a former head of the Canadian civil service compares the government he used to serve to Seinfeld, the "show about nothing."
If Americans want to know what a Tea Party government might look like, they can look to Canada. Not only have Canadian leaders adopted the same rhetorical flourishes as Glenn Beck, Michele Bachmann et al in their jihad on the census, they've adopted the same basic vision: that we have nothing left to aspire to as a country, and that the government that governs best doesn't govern at all