Michael MacDonald, The Canadian Press
HALIFAX - A coalition of Maritime natives has failed to prove off-
reserve Indians will be hurt by Ottawa's decision to scrap the
mandatory long-form census, a lawyer representing the federal
government told Federal Court on Tuesday.
Kathleen McManus was responding to the group's argument that the
federal cabinet's decision to replace the mandatory form with a
voluntary survey in 2011 violates the constitutional rights of
aboriginals and equality provisions of the Charter of Rights and
Freedoms.
The group argues the voluntary nature of the 2011 national household
survey — and some of its confusing questions about native identity —
will produce skewed data about off-reserve populations, leaving them
at a disadvantage when compared with non-natives.
The group's lawyer, Anne Smith, told the court that about 98 per cent
of the long forms were filled out and returned in 2006, but only about
40 to 50 per cent of voluntary surveys are ever returned.
As a result, the 2011 voluntary survey will likely produce unreliable
data from a smaller sample size, making it difficult for the
government to discharge its constitutional duties to aboriginal
peoples, Smith said.
"It's not a representative survey if it's not mandatory," Smith told
the court on the opening day of the hearing Monday.
Hundreds of other organizations have criticized the Harper government
for its decision to scrap the mandatory long-form census, saying the
new voluntary survey is inadequate because it has no legal teeth
behind it.
But McManus rejected those claims Tuesday, telling the Halifax court
that the group's request for a judicial review of the cabinet order
should be dismissed because it is too soon to determine the impact of
the new survey.
"Intervention at this time is premature," she told the court. "This is
anticipating that the national household survey will not be sufficient
... and programs will suffer. The evidence does not say what is going
to happen with any certainty."
McManus said the native group's lawyers failed to show how the
Constitution confers any specific legal rights that may have been
violated.
"There is no stand-alone constitutional duty to collect data," she
said.
She also told Judge Russel Zinn that the courts should be wary of
interfering with the federal cabinet's legislative powers.
The lawyer went on to say there's no evidence to suggest the
Constitution or the charter were violated or that existing or future
government programs for aboriginals will be adversely affected by the
data flowing from the new survey.
McManus argued there is very little difference between the mandatory
long form and its voluntary cousin, pointing out that the former had
61 questions and the latter has 66.
While the mandatory form was sent to 20 per cent of Canada's
dwellings, the new form will be sent to 33 per cent, she said.
As well, the two forms each contain four questions on aboriginal
identity and ancestry, though McManus admitted the wording in some of
those questions had been altered.
Still, she challenged the aboriginal group's assertion that the
questions are confusing, saying the voluntary form has been subjected
to rigorous testing.
"It's very much a living document," she said, citing affidavits from
Statistics Canada officials that state the quality of the data will be
lower, but the new survey still meets standards of statistical
methodology.
McManus noted that a previous request for a judicial review by a
francophone organization failed when the court ruled against the
argument that the long-form census was the only reliable source of
information about minority French-speaking communities.
In that case, the court also ruled it was premature to determine the
impact of the new survey and that there was no legislative requirement
for any particular survey method.
The aboriginal groups are asking the court to reinstate the long-form
census or insert questions about aboriginal ancestry into the existing
mandatory short-form census, which is sent to all households. As well,
they want the court to issue an injunction stopping the new survey.
The organizations involved in the latest case represent off-reserve
natives who describe themselves as Mi'kmaq, Malecite or Passamaquoddy.
The groups, which represent status and non-status Indians, include the
Native Council of Nova Scotia, the New Brunswick Aboriginal Peoples
Council, the Native Council of Prince Edward Island and the Maritime
Aboriginal Peoples Council, an umbrella group.
The Canadian Press, 2010
Click here to buy text ads on Breitbart
Show Comments / Post Comments