OTTAWA — Prime Minister Stephen Harper accused opposition parties of pushing for an unwanted election as he opened a summer caucus retreat, pledging to maintain the government’s focus on the economy.“We know there are some in the opposition coalition again threatening an election,” Mr. Harper said. “But, colleagues, that is not what Canadians want.”Emerging for the first time in more than two weeks, Mr. Harper limited his opening remarks to a few minutes, explaining that the caucus had “a lot of ground to cover,” in its discussions behind closed doors.Mr. Harper has left Industry Minister Tony Clement to bear the brunt of criticism over the past month about the government’s decision to scrap the mandatory long-form census, prompting the resignation of Munir Sheikh, the head of Statistics Canada.But Mr. Harper didn’t mention a word about the controversy, nor about his government’s slumping popularity in public opinion polls and other issues, such as criticism over security costs of the G8 and G20 summits hosted by Canada.Instead, he highlighted a list of recent accomplishments, including decisions made at the economic summits as well as the passage of the government’s budget legislation in the Senate, describing them as successful. He said government policies and decisions were designed to strengthen Canada at a time when the global economy remains fragile.“Canadians want us to continue to focus on governing and especially, colleagues, they want us to focus on the economy,” he said. “This is what we will continue to do. Under our leadership, Canada is emerging from this recession in a strong position and whether it is financial regulation, economic stimulus or deficit reduction, Canadian solutions are leading the way globally.”Mr. Harper’s comments came after two of the federal opposition leaders suggested in Newfoundland that a decision to call a fall election would be up to the prime minister. It also follows the release of the results of an Ekos survey that suggested the Tories had lost an 11-point lead over the federal Liberals in popular support and were now in a virtual tie with the opposition party.“My job is to get my troops ready for whatever happens. My job is to prepare that alternative, get all the policies ready,” Liberal Leader Michael Ignatieff told the St. John’s Telegram on Wednesday. “We’re not seeking an election, but we’re ready for one if it comes.”But NDP Leader Jack Layton told the newspaper that an election might be inevitable if Mr. Harper doesn’t show more willingness to compromise on controversial decisions, such as replacing the mandatory long-form census with a voluntary questionnaire.“That’s really going to be up to Mr. Harper,” Layton said. “So far, he hasn’t shown a tendency to want to work with other parties. It’s a ‘my way or the highway’ sort of approach, which doesn’t reflect the way Canadians like to see things done, in my view.”In order to force an election, all three opposition parties would have to vote against the government on a money bill.A spokesman for Mr. Harper said the prime minister tried to spend some time over the past few weeks with his family in Ottawa, while still being briefed and making decisions.The media are sometimes invited by political parties to listen to the opening speech of party caucuses and then asked to leave when the discussions begin.Mr. Harper did not make himself available to answer questions, but other Conservative MPs dismissed suggestions that recent government decisions are hurting the Conservative party’s popularity.