OTTAWA — Prime Minister Stephen Harper should show some leadership on the census controversy and engage in talks with the opposition parties about reaching a compromise, NDP Leader Jack Layton said on Thursday.He suggested at a news conference that Mr. Harper should meet with him to discuss ideas on how to proceed since the government’s decision to scrap the mandatory long-form census has met with such widespread opposition.“The New Democrats believe that a compromise can be found and it’s got to be found and it’s got to be done quickly for the sake of all those Canadians who count on the programs and services that are designed based on the information in the census,” Mr. Layton said.The Conservatives have stood firm in their decision over the last month to eliminate the compulsory long-form questionnaire in favour of a voluntary survey in 2011. Critics say the move will result in a body of unreliable data, which is counted upon by a range of organizations for policy planning.At a special meeting of the House of Commons industry committee on Tuesday, the minister responsible for the census, Tony Clement, repeatedly argued Canadians should not be forced to divulge personal information under threat of jail and that’s why the government is going with a voluntary survey to collect data.At the end of the meeting, during which a range of witnesses expressed their opinions on what has become a political headache for the government, the committee passed a motion calling on the Conservatives to reinstate the “mandatory nature”of the long-form census.On Thursday, Mr. Layton said one alternative the government could pursue is simply amending the legislation so that incarceration is not a penalty for failing to fill out the census. No one has ever been jailed in Canada for refusing to complete it, he noted.“It’s a bogus threat. It’s never been used, so let’s fix that,” said Mr. Layton.He encouraged the government to consider the proposal put forward by the National Statistics Council. The advisory body suggested the government reinstate the mandatory long-form census and at the same time, amend the Statistics Act to remove the threat of jail for not completing it.“We’ve got to preserve this only reliable portrait of who we are as a country,” said Mr. Layton.