OTTAWA - Opposition parties banded together to save the long-gun
registry, now they're trying to rescue the mandatory long-form census.
The Liberals submitted details to the House of Commons on Thursday of
a private member's bill that would specifically insert the mandatory
long-form census into the Statistics Act.
The bill could see first reading in the Commons by Oct. 1, and the
opposition hope they can hurry it through second reading and on to
committee hearings.
The Bloc Quebecois and the NDP said Thursday they would support a bill
to resurrect the mandatory long form.
Currently, the Act only refers to the requirement to hold a census of
the population — the short census — every five years.
The Liberal bill would also remove the threat of jail time for those
who refuse to fill out the long form, but keep the maximum $500 fine.
"It's almost a sacred trust that we have with civil society that we
will get them the information they need with which to plan, and
whether that's the Bank of Canada, or the public health officials, or
the Canadian Federation of Independent Business, people are counting
on this information and it must be comparable data with previous
censuses," said Liberal Carolyn Bennett, the bill's sponsor.
"If, all of a sudden, the methodology changes, no matter how much
tweaking they say they can do by trying to improve the voluntary
census, there is no way you can have the quality of data."
The Conservative government eliminated the mandatory long-form census
in June, citing concerns among some Canadians that the process was
intrusive and the threat of jail time unreasonable. They replaced it
with a voluntary national survey, that would be distributed to more
households.
The move set off a wide backlash from a variety of opponents,
including  religious groups, major charities, the Federation of
Francophone and Acadian Communities, statisticians and academics.
Several provinces and large municipalities also balked, saying the
loss of data would skew policy-making.
Former chief statistician Munir Sheikh resigned in the wake of the
decision, unable to support the government's contention the survey
would adequately substitute for the long-form census.
Both Bloc Leader Gilles Duceppe and NDP Leader Jack Layton were
unequivocal Thursday in their support of a bill to revive the long-
form.
"Legislation, although it would take time to put in place, is
something that absolutely we would support," said Layton, who earlier
called unsuccessfully for an emergency debate on the subject.
Industry Minister Tony Clement stood by the government's decision
during question period Thursday.
"We are working in a fair and reasonable way to have a balance between
the need for data and the idea that we should not coerce or force our
citizens who may conscientiously object to giving very private
information to government officials," Clement said.
Bennett argues there is enough time to act before the next census,
scheduled to begin in May 2011.
The Liberals also believe there will be no obstacles to the bill as it
makes its way through the parliamentary process.
Bills that involve the expenditure of public money must be introduced
by the government, but Bennett notes that reinstating the long-form
census would ultimately save money. She said Ottawa is spending at
least an extra $30 million on the short census and voluntary survey to
get it to more households and encourage responses.
The Canadian Press, 2010
Click here to buy text ads on Breitbart
Show Comments / Post Comments