OTTAWA - An editorial cartoon has gone viral inside the offices of the
mathematicians, statisticians and economists who work for Statistics
Canada.
The drawing shows Stephen Harper with his hand inside a puppet of
Ernie from Sesame Street. The caption: "Our new chief statistician,
he'll get the answers we want!"
It's a bit of gallows humour for demoralized staff who have just seen
their boss quit over the integrity and independence of their agency.
The cartoon also highlights what most insiders connected to the long-
census debacle know: it was the prime minister pulling the strings
from the get-go.
A tumultuous month into the public phase of the crisis, Harper's
office is also being blamed within his own government and party for
mishandling communications around the issue.
But senior bureaucrats know things could have been far more volatile.
Statistics Canada could have lost both its beloved censuses — short
form and long form — if Harper's administration followed its initial
plan.
The prime minister directed Industry Minister Tony Clement last winter
to seek options from Statistics Canada on how it could make the long
version of the census voluntary.
But sources say his circle's first instinct was to make the entire
thing voluntary — both the short census and the now controversial long
form.
Warned that the Brian Mulroney government had tried and failed to do
just that in 1986 — and that it would be unconstitutional — the Tories
backed off.
They focused, instead, on the long form, which is not directly
required by the constitution.
"They see it as a compromise. They say, 'OK, let's keep it but make it
voluntary.' It's an ideological compromise," said one longtime
insider.
Researchers, community organizations, provinces and municipal
governments urging Ottawa to restore the long-form census might want
to consider that Conservatives believe they've already compromised.
Replacing the mandatory long-form census with a voluntary survey was a
watered-down position, and public appeals for reinstatement appear to
be falling on deaf Tory ears.
Clement reflected this sentiment in a recent comment.
"That, I think, is a reasonable compromise position, and I'm certainly
looking forward to working with StatsCan in the months ahead to
implement that decision by government and to make sure it is done in a
way that was valid and correct," Clement told CBC television.
The census issue has been bubbling under the surface for years.
When Quebec MP Maxime Bernier was industry minister during the early
days of the Harper regime, he had to oversee the 2006 census. Bernier,
known to have a libertarian bent, and others made it clear within the
Tory caucus they found the obligatory nature of the questionnaires
objectionable.
"The idea of all that is to respect Canadians. They are intelligent.
They know what is good for them. And if they want to divulge
information about their private lives, they will do it. If they don't
want to, they won't," Bernier said in a recent interview.
"It's a noble decision, and Canadians will respect that in the end."
But Conservative insiders are slowly acknowledging they haven't done a
good job of persuading the public. They say communication of their
reasons has been bungled from the beginning — first internally and
then publicly.
As Harper's winter edict to get rid of the long form made the rounds
through the senior levels of the civil service, bureaucratic
opposition to the idea snowballed.
Department after department warned that they needed the data provided
by the mandatory form. Even a bulked-up, expensive voluntary survey
would not provide the same quality of information.
Making the long form voluntary, they said, would lead to lower quality
data at a far higher cost. Vulnerable groups, such as aboriginals and
low-income people, would be lost in the new survey, while middle-class
white people would be over-represented.
It would be better to stick with the status quo, the report said. Or,
if the government could not accept the mandatory long form, do away
with it altogether — or at least test-drive a voluntary replacement
before making rash decisions.
The message was ignored, although Agriculture Minister Gerry Ritz made
his case successfully to keep the mandatory Census of Agriculture,
with its lengthy list of detailed questions for farmers and the threat
of fines and jail time for failing to co-operate.
The discussion to that point was entirely behind closed doors.
The plan was eventually announced quietly on the last Saturday in
June, when public attention was consumed by the G20 riots, the
international summits in Toronto and Huntsville, and the Queen's visit
to Canada.
It was contained in a published order-in-council, as cabinet decisions
are called. Or rather, the long census simply didn't show up in the
document.
Information about this fundamental change to a 40-year-old product did
not appear in StatsCan's daily releases on their website. Instead, one
had to click on a small link called "Census 2011" that was never
publicly pointed out.
"Pirates didn't bury their treasure that carefully," said one insider.
Few people outside the top ranks of government had an inkling it was
in the works. No one outside government had been consulted — even
groups with whom Statistics Canada was in regular contact about how to
frame the next census.
And the announcement was left until the last minute, leaving just a
few weeks between its publication and the date Statistics Canada
needed to start work on implementing the new arrangement.
But if there were ever any hopes of the issue being lost in the haze
of summer, they were quickly dashed.
Within a day of The Canadian Press reporting the announcement,
municipal governments realized the information they rely on to make
almost every key policy decision was about to be eroded.
News releases from organizations as diverse as the Canadian Jewish
Congress and the Federation of Francophone and Acadian Communities
began to appear daily, calling on the government to reverse its
decision.
"I think they were overwhelmed by effectiveness of the communications
of the proponents of the status quo," said one Conservative.
"They underestimated the ability of their opponents to keep the story
going."
The Prime Minister's Office's response in the early days of the debate
was unusual at best.
The director of communications, Dimitri Soudas, sent reporters an
email underlining how many Canadians had listed their religion as
"Jedi" during the 2006 census, and making reference to census workers
visiting homes at 10 p.m. — something Statistic Canada says does not
occur.
Clement was forced to defend the decision with no prior consultation
or polling to back him up. Neither was there any clear indication of
just who in Canada was upset by the intrusive questions in the long
form.
Bernier claimed that as industry minister, he had received 1,000
complaints a day during the census season of 2006 — but then couldn't
produce a single one.
"They didn't do a very good job laying the groundwork for this," one
Tory said of the PMO. "They didn't really precondition the audience."
Cabinet members such as Transport Minister John Baird and Treasury
Board President Stockwell Day helped spread a few untruths, ridiculing
non-existent questions in the census on bathrooms and reading
material.
Other ministers remained silent, including Canadian Heritage Minister
James Moore, despite an investigation by the official languages
commissioner over the issue.
Communications at Statistics Canada was clamped down. Soon only
trickles of bare-bones information emerged from an agency that once
prided itself for transparency and responsiveness.
Meanwhile, the pressure grew on Chief Statistician Munir Sheikh
personally. Sheikh had always prided himself on loyally implementing
government decisions to the best of his ability even if he thought
they were wrong.
Suddenly Statistics Canada was in the news every day, and the
reporting was not about the raw data.
Adding to Sheikh's angst was the fact legendary chief statistician
Ivan Fellegi, who had reigned at Statistics Canada for 22 years, had
taken a public stand against the decision. He told The Canadian Press
on June 30 he would have resigned if the Conservatives had made the
same move during his tenure.
Some insiders felt Sheikh, a man used to carrying out unpopular cost-
cutting exercises within the government, should have spoken out much
more forcefully about the change months earlier.
"All of this could have taken place well before the government
announced anything and hence any compromise would have taken place
with no loss of face for the Tories," said one.
Things began coming to a head with Sheikh on Friday, July 17, when
Clement said he chose one of Statistics Canada's options on the census
"with their recommendation."
"I asked StatsCan if I accept the ad campaign, the increased sample
size, would this give us robust data, they said, yes, it would give us
the data that everyone hankers for," Clement said.
But Statistics Canada's integrity, and the public's trust in its data,
had always depended on the agency acting without political
interference. For Sheikh, it was clear that Clement was taking the
agency in a direction it did not want to go and claiming, incorrectly,
that the agency was on side.
Sensing that Sheikh might be preparing to exit, Clement and the clerk
of the Privy Council, Wayne Wouters, sent signals to him that they
wanted him to stay on at the agency and that they had faith in his
work. But it seemed Sheikh, who had spent 38 years in the public
service, was already out the door.
His resignation has galvanized opposition to the census decision. It
has also deepened the rift between a civil service that has long felt
trampled, and the Conservative government that has long suspected it
could not rely on the bureaucracy.
The Harper government's final communications move was at the special
sitting of the House of Commons industry committee last week.
It was a chance to move the story away from the various groups and
governments that were criticizing the decision, and pin the story on
the opposition.
Tories on the committee were able to get witnesses to acknowledge that
the threat of jail times was excessive, something held up as proof the
government made the right decision.
Quietly during the hearings, Clement sent signals that there could be
a compromise in the works. But he raised false hopes, and by the end
of the day, the Conservative determination had hardened once again.
Despite all the headlines and the backlash, there is a strongly held
belief within the Conservative ranks that the census story has not
penetrated the psyche of many average Canadians and will soon fizzle
out.
"It's just another dead news-cycle story," said one Conservative MP.
"Most people will look at it, and say, what's the difference?"
With time quickly running out before the short census and the new
voluntary replacement for the long census have to go to print, hopes
among the government critics for a compromise are switching to
despair.
Premiers meeting this week in Manitoba for their annual Council of the
Federation meetings — many of whom oppose the census move — will
likely be the last test of the Conservatives' resolve.
Said one insider: "The Council of the Federation might well be the
last kick at the can."
The Canadian Press, 2010
Click here to buy text ads on Breitbart
Show Comments / Post Comments