* Conservatives at 33.3 pct, down from 35.6 pct
* Liberals at 32.8 pct, up from 29.2 pct * Pollster says early election unlikely OTTAWA, Sept 8 (Reuters) - Canada's Conservative government
has seen its lead over the main opposition Liberals evaporate
following recent controversies and the two parties are now
statistically deadlocked, according to a public opinion poll
released on Wednesday. The Conservatives, who have only a minority of seats in
Parliament and need support from at least one other party to
stay in power, fell to 33.3 percent support from 35.6 percent,
according to the poll by Nanos Research. The Liberals were at 32.8 percent, up from 29.2 percent, in
the monthly survey conducted for the Globe and Mail newspaper
and CTV. Pollster Nik Nanos said that the change in the numbers was
due mainly to "self inflicted damage" by the Conservatives and
that neither party would likely chance an early election when
Parliament returns from its summer break on Sept. 20. "Overall, although election speculation may be on the rise
because of the tightened ballot numbers, it is most likely
that, tough talk from the leaders aside, an election at this
time would be risky for both the Conservatives and the
Liberals," he said in a statement. The summer is normally a quiet time in Canadian politics,
but the government's decision this summer to scrap a mandatory
long-form census has raised the ire of a raft of interest
groups that say they need the data to make policy decisions.
[ID:nN05134459] [ID:nN22118361] Other issues in the coming session of Parliament that could
provoke a showdown include the budget deficit, gun control,
anti-crime legislation and above all, the economy. [nRISKCA] The results of the Nanos poll echoed a survey last week by
Ekos that also showed the two main parties in a dead heat.
[ID:nN02189935] Both Prime Minister Stephen Harper and Liberal leader
Michael Ignatieff have said in recent weeks that they do not
want an autumn election. Under Canada's electoral system, a party usually needs at
least 40 percent public support to capture a majority of the
308 seats in the House of Commons, and around 36 percent to
form a workable minority government. The Nanos telephone survey of 1,014 Canadians was conducted
between Aug. 28 and Sept. 3 and is considered accurate to
within 3.1 percentage points, 19 times out of 20.
(Reporting by John McCrank; editing by Peter Galloway)