The Liberals are looking to reconvene a Parliamentary committee this summer and demanding Industry Minister Tony Clement explain and justify the government’s decision to scrap the long-form census for 2011.Industry critic Marc Garneau said in a news conference on Wednesday that he will ask for the Industry, Science and Technology Committee to meet this summer and insist Clement provide evidence of the privacy concerns the government says prompted what Garneau called a “secretive, manipulative move.”“This is a government that on a daily basis from 2006 talked about transparency and accountability, and is completely hypocritical about the need to be transparent and to be open with Canadians,” Mr. Garneau said. “This kind of announcement in the quiet of summer is very typical for them.”He insisted the decision to scrap the long-form mandatory census and replace it with a voluntary survey was not motivated by the privacy concerns cited by Clement, saying the Auditor General had “nothing but praise” for Statistics Canada in a 2007 report. Rather, Mr. Garneau says the change is ideologically driven and intended to leave certain groups of Canadians out of the national demographic portrait.“By attacking the census, this government is throwing us in the dark on immigration-related issues. They’re doing the same for aboriginals, visible minorities and the disabled, and for those arguing for the need for pay equity,” he said. “That’s what the Conservatives’ endgame is here — to permanently hobble the government’s ability to enforce legislation and deliver social programs aimed at our most vulnerable.”Garneau dismissed suggestions the census is a coercive burden on Canadians, saying it’s a “civic duty” similar to jury duty, and that with 20% of households receiving the long-form every five years, people would have to fill it out perhaps three times in their lifetime. He said he’s never heard a complaint from a constituent about the census being invasive, and he said he hasn’t found a single documented case of someone being jailed in Canada for refusing to fill out the form. On average, about 50 people each census cycle might be charged for not filling out the form and about half a dozen end up paying fines, he said, maintaining the coercion issue has been overblown.“The decision by this government concerning the census is truly a stupid decision,” he said.The Liberals have also vowed to change the Statistics Act and restore the mandatory long-form census if the Conservatives don’t back down. They would need the support of the other two opposition parties to do so.“In the past the government of Canada received complaints about the long form from citizens that felt it was an intrusion of their privacy,” Mr. Clement said in a statement Tuesday. “We believe the new form that will be used in 2011 will reasonably limit what Canadians felt was an intrusion of their privacy.”