There has been a lot of talk in recent days about Industry Minister Tony Clement suggesting that one person, one Canadian complaining about the scrapping of the mandatory long-form census is a enough to convince the government to change policy.
The minister doesn't agree that's what he said.
In fact, just yesterday the minister tried to defend his statement by saying this, "Let me interpret what I said, because the question was more of a general question."
For the record, I was the reporter asking the questions in this case and I thought it might be worthwhile to transcribe the entire exchange and let you decide what the Minister actually said and interpret it for yourself.
Let me know what you think.
Barton: "Mr Clement, there were never a 1,000 emails about the census..."
Clement: "Well, I can't speak for Maxime Bernier, but I can tell you that if you have a complaint about the census the last place you're going to complain about is to the census people. You're going to complain to your MP."
Barton: "I know, but if you're the industry minister and you were getting 1,000 complaints a day of whatever nature about the census, you would have told Statistics Canada, 'Hey, there's something going on here, people aren't happy'?"
Clement: "I can't speak for past industry ministers. They have to speak for themselves. But all I can tell you  is, that it stands to reason that if you have a complaint about the coercive tactics of a government agency the last place you're going to complain about that is to the government agency. You're going to complain to your duly elected local MP."
Barton: "But then why aren't people tabling all those complaints? because we don't have them."
Clement: "I got a letter in my question period book from a Liberal MP from Richmond Hill who complained to the minister about that very topic. So to say they don't exist is not true."
Barton: "But they're not in the hundreds, they're not in the thousands..."
Clement: "I can't quantify. Even if there's one complaint, if it's a legitimate complaint, even if there's one complaint from a Canadian about the coercive tactics used by a government agency we have to consider that complaint a valid question about public policy."
Barton: "Sure, but we don't change public policy for one person do we?"
Clement: "Why not? If they're right."
Barton: "We change public policy for one person?"
Clement: "If they're right."
Tags: census, industry minister, maxime bernier, one is the loneliest number that you'll ever have, tony clement