In honour of the first-ever World Statistics Day declared by the United Nations, Tony Clement sent a memo to all Statistics Canada staff on Wednesday, congratulating them on their sterling reputation and hard work.“It is my pleasure, as the minister responsible for Statistics Canada, to congratulate the men and women of Statistics Canada on building what is universally recognized as a world-leading national statistical office,” Mr. Clement wrote. “Everywhere Statistics Canada’s information is used with confidence, and this is something of which you can be enormously proud, as I am.”The message follows the government’s decision this summer to make Canada’s mandatory long-form census a voluntary exercise as of 2011. Documents admitted in a Federal Court case launched by the Federation of Francophone and Acadian Communities — which ultimately proved unsuccessful in reversing the decision — show the government acknowledged internally that the move would render some of the data unusable.Mr. Clement’s message was sent to staff by Wayne Smith, the acting chief statistician who took over when Munir Sheikh who resigned in July in protest of the government’s decision.In celebration of World Statistics Day, Mr. Smith addressed employees directly on Wednesday and a panel of experts discussed “the importance of official statistics in a democratic society.”Bruce Little, a former economics reporter and special adviser to the Bank of Canada, acknowledged on the panel that “these cannot be happy times” at Statistics Canada. He said the government had “wilfully throttled” one of its most important surveys and attempted to “denigrate” its work and “demonize” the agency. In response, Mr. Smith acknowledged that some employees feel the government made a mistake, but he emphasized that Statistics Canada was “moving on” with its responsibility to implement the decision. He disputed the outside perception that his organization is “demolished and demoralized,” maintaining morale is solid and the agency is determined to make the voluntary survey a success and an example for other countries.Statistics Canada has long had a strong international reputation, and in the early 1990s, the agency earned the top spot in The Economist’s “good statistics guide.”The Liberals held a news conference on Wednesday, decrying what they say is government waste in spending an additional $31-million to send out more of the surveys that will replace the long-form census and to test the new methodology, only to generate shoddy information.The NDP announced that industry critic Brian Masse will introduce a new private member’s bill on Thursday aimed at amending the Statistics Act to “prevent any further political interference with the role and mandate of Canada’s chief statistician.”The UN designated Oct. 20 as the first World Statistics Day to “recognize the importance of statistics in shaping our societies.”“Statistics permeate modern life. They are the basis for many governmental, business and community decisions,” Secretary General Ban Ki-moon said in a statement. “They provide information and insight about the trends and forces that affect our lives.”Don McLeish, president of the Statistical Society of Canada, sees irony in the fact that Mr. Ban sent a letter to world leaders announcing World Statistics Day and stressing the importance of official statistics around the same time the Conservatives announced the decision to scrap the mandatory long-form census in June. “I think they’re feeling knocked around,” he says of morale at Statistics Canada. “My sense is they’re not very cheerful, but they’re not saying much for obvious reasons.”