The information Statistics Canada collects in the census forms the basis for decisions by governments on everything from education to health care.   (CBC)Getting rid of the mandatory long-form census will set Manitoba back 40 years, says a provincial cabinet minister.
Peter Bjornson, the minister responsible for the Manitoba Bureau of Statistics, has written to federal Industry Minister Tony Clement to express "serious concern" about the federal government's decision to scrap the mandatory long-form census.
In the letter, Bjornson urges Clement to reverse the decision and do some proper consultation and review.
The information Statistics Canada collects in the census forms the basis for decisions by government on everything from education to health care.
Community groups and business people also use the publicly accessible information to make decisions, Bjornson said.
Without it, everyone would be operating in the dark, he added.
"The impact that this will have … does set back our system 40 years and it seems counterintuitive," Bjornson said.
Peter Bjornson, minister responsible for the Manitoba Bureau of Statistics, is urging the federal government to reverse the decision to scrap the mandatory census.  (Manitoba government) "When I recently attended a federal-provincial territorial meeting of the labour market ministers, there was much discussion about the need for more information."
If the federal government no longer collects the information, the Manitoba government would still want that information — but that could cost millions of tax dollars, Bjornson said.
There could also be an impact on transfer payments from the federal government because those payments are based on census data.
"There will be higher costs, more burden for our citizens, and ultimately you'd be getting less … bang for your buck," Bjornson said.
Clement announced at the end of June that the long-form part of the 2011 census would no longer be mandatory because of privacy concerns.
Canadians who receive the long form would be able to refuse to fill it out.
Bjornson said the change, made without consultation with provinces, territories and other constituencies "is very disquieting."
Clement's decision has caused a furor and prompted Munir Sheikh, the head of Statistics Canada, to announce his resignation on July 21.
In his statement of resignation, Sheikh insisted a voluntary survey cannot be a substitute for the mandatory form.
Industry Minister Tony Clement said the long-form part of the 2011 census will no longer be mandatory.  (Adrian Wyld/Canadian Press)On Thursday, Liberal House leader Ralph Goodale told reporters in Ottawa that the reputation of the internationally renowned agency is "hanging by a thread at the hand of a bumbling minister and a Conservative government that simply doesn't believe in fact-based decision-making."
In a separate news conference held shortly after Goodale spoke, the NDP's Charlie Angus called on Harper to overrule his minister.
"Tony Clement says that he wants to abandon the long-form census, and he said that Statistics Canada supported him. Now we see that is clearly not the fact," Angus said.
Shortly after those comments, Clement dismissed the growing calls for him to reverse his decision, saying he and Prime Minister Stephen Harper are on the same page on the issue.
"There's not a micron of difference of opinion between myself and the prime minister on this," Clement told the CBC's Rosemary Barton in an interview on Power &amp;amp; Politics with Evan Solomon.