OTTAWA — The federal government announced changes to the 2011 census yesterday in a bid to ensure its controversial plan to scrap the long-form questionnaire won’t violate official language laws.Industry Minister Tony Clement made the announcement hours after a Federal Court sided with a francophone group that is challenging Ottawa over its decision to replace the mandatory long-form census with a voluntary survey, alleging it violates the Official Languages Act and the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.The industry minister said the government is moving two questions about languages from the now defunct long-form census to the still-mandatory short-form census, thereby removing any doubt that the government’s decision violated language laws.“I’ve always said that we should be in compliance,” Mr. Clement said. “Perhaps there’s an overabundance of caution, perhaps it’s also predicated on new advice that we received from the new chief statistician. It just felt to be the prudent and wise thing to do to ensure that there was no question that we were fulfilling our obligations under the Official Languages Act and the best way to do that was to migrate the two questions over to the short-form census.”Canadians will now be asked in the census if they can speak English or French well enough to conduct a conversation; what language is spoken most often at home; and if any languages other than that one are also spoken at home.Mr. Clement also said the Conservatives will introduce legislation in the fall seeking to drop jail time as a possible penalty for Canadians who refuse to answer mandatory questionnaires administered by the government. Canadians will still be subject to a fine of as much as $500 if they don’t complete the census form or other mandatory surveys, such as the Census of Agriculture.Yesterday’s initiatives change the government’s course on cancelling the mandatory long-form census, a decision that has sparked major controversy and prompted the resignation of the head of Statistics Canada.Mr. Clement wouldn’t comment on how the changes might affect the Court challenge launched by the Federation of Francophone and Acadian Communities of Canada. Yesterday morning, a Federal Court judge in Ottawa agreed to fast-track the group’s case to ensure the matter could be settled in time for the government to make any necessary changes to the 2011 census. Roza Aronovitch wrote in her decision that the case “raises an important question of public interest regarding the linguistic rights of Canadians” and she set hearings for Sept. 27 and 28. The Official Languages Act requires the government to provide services for minority French-speaking communities, and the group argues the data collected from the long-form census questionnaire are essential for determining where those services must be available.NDP leader Jack Layton credited the francophone group for provoking the change.“The Harper government is finally starting to admit that it was wrong,” he told Postmedia News. “Whatever logic they thought they had is now gone.”The NDP leader said he’s still going to pursue his own plans — seeking an emergency debate or even legislation — to bring the census controversy to the House of Commons when Parliament resumes on Sept. 20, because he doesn’t have details about Mr. Clement’s proposed bill.The opposition parties have repeatedly called on the government to reinstate the long-form census, which was previously sent to approximately 20% of households, but the Conservatives are not backing down on that front. Mr. Clement continued his defence of the government’s decision, however, saying it is striking a balance between the need for data and the concerns of Canadians who didn’t want to be forced to answer the 40-page long census form.“This is a decision that we made as a government and we think it’s important to represent Canadians who felt that the long form was too intrusive and too coercive so that’s who we’re representing,”he told Postmedia News. He also rejected the assertions from the opposition that he misled Canadians and gave them the impression that Statistics Canada was in full support of the government’s new policy.Postmedia News