Ottawa municipal politicians denounced the federal government for ditching the mandatory long-form census, saying it will cripple local planning.  With no consultation, the federal government last month quietly scrapped the mandatory 40-page census that goes out to millions of Canadians and helps Statistics Canada track data on the country's population and social and economic trends. Instead, a voluntary long-form census will be sent to households next year.
Sources inside Statistics Canada have said the decision was entirely the government's, and that agency officials neither sought the change nor endorsed it.
Industry Minister Tony Clement has said the government made the change to protect Canadians from a coercive, prying government.
Coun. Jan Harder said, "I think it's nuts. I thought that from the first I heard of it. I don't think that they understand how important census information is to the municipality."
Coun. Marianne Wilkinson said, "It's not a smart decision. I think it's not good even for their own research at the federal level. They need this information and I think it was done without thinking through the consequences."
Forecasters say they'll be forced to guess using old data when it comes time to decide how to spend tax money on services such as transportation and health.
"It will affect our ability for the city overall to efficiently provide services, to know where the needs are on a neighbourhood-scale basis," said Ian Cross, who is in charge of Ottawa city's strategic forecasting. "It will have a very drastic effect on city operations."
Coun. Peter Hume, who is also president of the Association of Municipalities of Ontario, said there will be strong lobbying from cities to have the decision overturned.
"This has been the historic responsibility of the federal government, and they should continue to shoulder that responsibility. Not only is it good for our cities, it's good for our provinces. In fact, it's good for the nation."
With files from The Canadian Press