A Saskatoon woman found guilty of refusing to fill in the  long-form census in 2006 has been granted an absolute discharge. Sandra Finley, 61, "is clearly a person of good character who  refused to fill in the form on the basis of principle," provincial  court Judge Sheila Whelan said Thursday. Ms. Finley was charged before the federal government changed its  policy last summer, making completing the long-form census voluntary  rather than mandatory. She was facing a maximum penalty of a $500 fine and a jail sentence  of up to three months. Judge Whelan said a fine would not deter Ms. Finley, who had  already incurred considerable expense fighting the charge rather  than fill in the form. Ms. Finley argued at trial that the long-form census breached her  constitutional right to privacy. Judge Whelan found last week that Ms. Finley had not proved her  Charter rights had been violated. Despite the finding of guilt, the Judge let Ms. Finley off without  a criminal record. "I didn't know what to expect because I totally did not expect a  guilty verdict in the first place," Ms. Finley told reporters. "So  this is welcomed." In passing sentence, Judge Whelan referred to a July, 2010  statement from Industry Minister Tony Clement, who said the  Government of Canada had received complaints from citizens who felt  the long-form was an intrusion of their privacy. "The government does not think it is necessary for Canadians to  provide Statistics Canada with the number of bedrooms in their home,  or what time of the day they leave for work, or how long it takes  them to get there. The government does not believe it is appropriate  to force Canadians to divulge detailed personal information under  threat of prosecution," Mr. Clement said in the statement. While the privacy issue was the basis of the legal challenge, Ms.  Finley has always been frank about the fact her unwillingness to  participate was largely to protest the involvement of Lockheed  Martin Canada. The federal government bought computer hardware and software from  the U.S. aerospace manufacturer and advanced technology firm. It  also contracted out printing of census forms to the Canadian  subsidiary of the huge company. Ms. Finley has said she feared census information could be obtained  by the company and objected to Canada giving business that would  enrich the military-industrial complex. "For me this is not over, and it's not over for many, many other  Canadians," she said.