OTTAWA — Prime Minister Stephen Harper’s chief of staff, Guy Giorno, will likely be leaving his job in the coming months as the Conservative government attempts to bolster its image in advance of a possible election expected next spring.Mr. Giorno’s departure has been rumoured for months, and while the Prime Minister’s Office did not confirm the pending resignation on Friday, sources confirmed that Harper’s top aide has decided to move on. He has been chief of staff since the summer of 2008 and has reportedly decided to spend more time with his wife and young children. He is expected to leave by the end of the year.The departure will leave a big hole in the senior political ranks for Mr. Harper, who has come to rely heavily on Giorno.Indeed, the prime minister will be faced with a critical choice: Replace Mr. Giorno with a trusted partisan loyalist from inside the government, or reach outside for someone with managerial expertise who can bring a fresh view to matters.Mr. Giorno, a lawyer, was brought into the PMO after the resignation of Ian Brodie, who was one of Mr. Harper’s most loyal aides and who ensured the government was disciplined in its approach to policy and communications during its first two years in office.Mr. Giorno also ran a tight ship, said observers. He came from a highly partisan background, having served as chief of staff to Mike Harris when he was Ontario’s Conservative premier.The political file was active during his time at the PMO: An October 2008 election that delivered another Conservative minority; the political fallout from the government’s attempt to end public subsidies to political parties (abandoned after the opposition parties threatened to defeat the Tories); efforts to kick-start the ailing economy with a massive stimulus package; and bad publicity over issues such as the firing of Helena Guergis, to the recent controversy over the long-form census.The political temperature will likely rise even further as MPs return to the House of Commons Sept. 20 for the fall session. A Tory backbencher’s bill to end the long-gun registry is expected to dominate attention in the first couple of weeks. Beyond that, the government hopes to pursue its law-and-order agenda by getting various bills through Parliament and will likely come forward with contentious legislation to deal with boatloads of refugees that have shown up on Canadian shores. The opposition is likely to attack the government’s recent purchase of F-35 fighter jets.Throughout it all, Mr. Harper will try to convince voters that the next election is about choosing either a Conservative majority or a government formed by a Liberal-NDP-Bloc Quebecois coalition. The opposition parties will reject that scenario and insist the government must be defeated because it is narrow-minded and secretive.By the time Mr. Giorno’s replacement is hired, the government’s challenge will be to craft a cost-cutting 2011 budget and a related policy platform which it can promote in a spring campaign. An election isn’t certain then, but many expect the parliamentary vote on the budget could act as a springboard for the defeat of the government.