OTTAWA -Wearing a toque equipped with dangling braids which  made him look undeniably goofy, Jim Prentice surveyed the iceberg  bits floating high above the Arctic Circle last July with a  face-filled smile which make him look even more comical. "You know what?" he said, doing the most authentic gee-whiz,  boy-scout imitation I've ever seen, "I've got the best job in the  government." That he would consider being the Environment Minister under Stephen  Harper the best job in government says a lot about the preternatural  optimism of Jim Prentice. A few hours earlier, he had been staring through a mask into  freezing Arctic water surveying the 155-year-old wreck of HMS  Investigator, which had been discovered a few days earlier. He calls that excellent adventure his personal highlight, a fitting  finale for a minister who seized the career-killing Environment  portfolio with orders from the Prime Minister to simply to lower the  temperature on global warming and, despite collecting many  international fossil awards, zeroed in on park-creation,  pollution-reduction and easing the power grid off a dirty coal diet. With Jim Prentice's ministerial resignation yesterday, effective  immediately, Stephen Harper has lost his best political fixer. Arguably the most respected minister in the Cabinet, which was  underlined by an all-party swarm of MPs surrounding his desk moments  after the Commons announcement, he will not be easily replaced. Unflappable to a fault and perhaps the stiffest interview on the  front bench showing very rare bursts of oratorical fire, he was  nevertheless a necessary voice of consensus-seeking moderation in a  cabinet dominated by hard partisan hawks. For those with long memories, Mr. Prentice was also the first face  of reunification as a Progressive Conservative leadership hopeful  who campaigned for a merger with the Canadian Alliance and then  stepped aside in a byelection to give Stephen Harper a free ride  into the House of Commons. Perhaps for that reason, he commanded the unique respect and  confidence of Prime Minister Harper, although his occasional  flirtations with leadership ambition could explain why he always  landed thankless portfolios in trouble. But even there he scored more successes than failures and leaves  politics without a scratch of major scandal on his resume. If your cellphone bill is coming down, it's because Industry  Minister Prentice sold off a swath of air spectrum space for  $5-billion to create the cutthroat competition that's just now  coming on stream. He dedicated vast tracks of new parkland on the west coast and far  north -- expanding national park space by 30% -- and set out to  visit as many of them as possible. When given the always-thankless Indian Affairs job, he managed to  negotiate the terms of a residential school apology, which remains the parliamentary goosebump moment of the  decade. But his real power lay in being chairman of the operations  committee, an air traffic control position of sorts which decided  what priorities are accelerated and which issues are left attached  to the parking brake. Mr. Prentice says the headhunting call to become vice-chair of the  CIBC was serendipitous, although the timing is convenient as he just  qualified for a lucrative parliamentary pension last summer. He  insists he holds no bad feelings toward the Harper government. "It has nothing to do with any difference of opinion. I've simply  done my tour of duty and, like my dad, a former NHL player, said,  you should leave while the fans are still cheering," he told me. Even so, there were times when Mr. Prentice appeared uncomfortable  with the government's direction and would commit the Conservative  equivalent of treason by ignoring a PMO command. When approached as Industry Minister by senior political operatives  demanding he end the mandatory long-form census, for example, he  told them to take a hike. And he'd often shake his head disparagingly at colleagues --  including one named Stephen Harper--who regarded Liberals and New  Democrats as mortal enemies even while Prentice mingled comfortably  in social settings with opposition MPs. Starting in January, Prentice says his new job means he'll shuttle  between Calgary and Toronto, which sets up a tantalizing  possibility. The mark against Jim Prentice as future leader of the Conservatives  was being a Calgary MP aiming to replace a Calgarian in a job which  demands greater geographical separation from the party's crib. But a moderate Conservative emerging after four years of success in  Toronto boardrooms might be seen as a tempting fresh-face recruit  for a leadership rerun in the post-Harper world. He adamantly insists otherwise, but as the cream of a very shallow  talent pool, there are worse bets than putting money on Jim Prentice  floating to the top.   dmartin@nationalpost.com--------- JIM PRENTICE Age 54 Training property-rights lawyer First elected 2004 Riding Member of Parliament for Calgary Centre-North Portfolios Environment Minister since 2008; industry minister from  2007 to 2008; Indian affairs and northern development minister from  2006 to 2007 Notable acts As industry minister, he blocked the sale of Canadian  strategic technology company MDA to the United States and oversaw  the Spectrum Auction of wireless rights. As Indian affairs minister,  he reformed the land claims process. In 2003, ran for leadership of  the Progressive Conservative Party, coming second. Quote When I entered federal politics in 2001 I made a commitment  that my time in politics would last eight to 10 years. It has now  been nine years and it is time for me to pursue new opportunities  outside of public life.