OTTAWA — Prime Minister Stephen Harper launched the next phase of his minority government on Friday with a small cabinet shuffle that suggests he is preparing more for political warfare than peace in the coming months.Mr. Harper tapped the volatile, and fiercely partisan John Baird for the delicate job of navigating the Conservative government’s agenda through Parliament.Although Mr. Harper dismissed suggestions that naming Mr. Baird government House leader was a sign he’s trying to provoke a fall election, NDP House leader Libby Davies wasn’t buying it.“I don’t see it as an olive branch,” Ms. Davies said. “(Mr. Baird) is the heavy hitter for the Conservative government so I’m skeptical of the role he’ll be playing as House leader. He can be a loud-mouthed bully.”Her Liberal and Bloc Quebecois counterparts were guarded, too.“We’ll just have to take it a day at a time,” said Ralph Goodale, the Liberal House leader.Bloc MP Pierre Paquette said that given Mr. Baird’s history as the Conservatives’ defender in chief, he’s not convinced the Ottawa MP will be able to improve parliamentary relations and stave off an election.Mr. Goodale and Ms. Davies were quick to squelch election talk. Contrary to Mr. Harper’s assertions the opposition is itching for an “unnecessary election,” they said, their priority is to make Parliament work and they hope Mr. Baird is ready co-operate so MPs can respond to the needs of Canadians, especially on the jobs front.In an early positive gesture, Mr. Baird and his officials got in touch with the opposition House leaders within hours of the appointment to say he also wanted to make Parliament work.A one-time house leader in the Ontario government of Mike Harris, Mr. Baird was the only head-turning appointment in a shuffle on Friday that put veteran minister Chuck Strahl in Mr. Baird’s transportation portfolio and John Duncan, MP for Vancouver Island North, in Mr. Strahl’s vacated post of minister of Indian and northern affairs.The critical economic, foreign affairs and defence portfolios were left untouched, evidence Mr. Harper is anxious to signal at home and, perhaps more importantly abroad, that Canada is staying the course in the face of global uncertainties.Harper’s tweaking of the cabinet came as the government remains on the defensive over controversies such as deciding to scrap the mandatory long-form census and purchasing 65 F-35 fighter jets from a sole source at a cost of up to $16-billion.A fresh poll by EKOS also says Conservative support has plunged 11 points in the past few weeks, putting the Tories and Liberals neck-in-neck in public popularity.Mr. Harper, who says the economy is his government’s No. 1 priority, refused to comment on the party’s sagging political fortunes.But he was fulsome on Mr. Baird’s credentials, describing him as one of his most experienced and trusted ministers with a proven record as a good negotiator after sealing many infrastructure agreements with the provinces and territories.“One must have a lot of qualities (as House leader): the capacity to act, the capacity to listen, the capacity to negotiate and the capacity to force things through from time to time,” Mr. Harper told reporters after the swearing in at Rideau Hall. “John has all the qualities and the good judgment to do this job.”Mr. Strahl of British Columbia inherits the job of bringing the Tories’ economic action plan to fruition within the next year.The Federation of Canadian Municipalities said it hoped he would continue Mr. Baird’s “100% focus” on delivering practical results with infrastructure dollars.Mr. Harper told reporters he doesn’t anticipate needing to roll out a second round of stimulus spending. He added, however, the bump in the jobless rate announced Friday demonstrates anew the “fragile” nature of the recovery, and he didn’t rule out the need for additional action down the road.Mr. Duncan, who has been Mr. Strahl’s parliamentary secretary on the Indian and northern affairs file for more than two years, is a low-profile MP who returned to Parliament in 2008 after losing his Vancouver North Island seat to the NDP in 2006.A promotion to the full cabinet could boost his chances of hanging on to the seat, which he narrowly won in 2008, in the next election.Aboriginal groups said they hoped Mr. Duncan’s time with Mr. Strahl means he will be up to speed on the issues.With files from Mike De Souza and Juliet O’Neill, Postmedia News