OTTAWA — Opposition parties lashed out at the Conservative government and Industry Minister Tony Clement on Thursday in the wake of the resignation of Canada’s top statistician amid changes to this country’s mandatory long-form census.Liberal House leader Ralph Goodale said having Statistics Canada chief Munir Sheikh step down is a huge blow and the decision to switch the long-form census to a voluntary process could cause irreparable harm to the federal agency.“StatsCan has a world-class reputation for its methods, for the reliability of its arithmetic and the credibility of the institution,” he said. “It would be a huge tragedy if that Canadian model of excellence is sacrificed on the altar of Conservative (politics).”Mr. Goodale, who sat next to a five-inch stack of about 600 printed emails expressing concern over the census changes, said if action is taken immediately by the Conservatives, there is a chance things could smooth over. Any delays, he said, could mean a grim outlook for Statistics Canada.“The damage at this stage could be repaired if the government quickly reverses its course,” Mr. Goodale told reporters. “If the government persists in this course, they will certainly undermine the integrity and credibility of the organization and may well do it permanent harm.“If they quickly say . . . they’re changing their minds, reversing course and apologize and reinstate Mr. Sheikh, the damage could be repaired, but they need to act almost instantly.”Mr. Sheikh resigned on Wednesday evening over the contentious changes — which involve scrapping the mandatory long-form census and replacing it with a voluntary survey — announced at the end of June. The move was met with heavy criticism from community and religious groups, municipalities, think-tanks and academics. “This relates to the question of whether a voluntary survey can become a substitute for a mandatory census. It cannot,” Mr. Sheikh said in a statement posted to the agency’s website late Wednesday. “Under the circumstances, I have tendered my resignation to the prime minister.”For his part, Mr. Clement, who oversees Statistics Canada, said in a statement he acknowledged Mr. Sheikh’s resignation “with regret.”In an effort to get more answers on the process that led to the census changes, the Liberals filed a request under the Access to Information Act on Thursday to receive correspondence relating to the Conservatives’ decision, including emails, briefing notes and records of meetings held to discuss the matter.“We want to know what advice the Conservatives in fact received, and ignored, before moving ahead on this file without one iota of public consultation,” Mr. Goodale said. “The minister says StatsCan recommended the change, but StatsCan vehemently denies that and we’re going to continue to seek the truth.”Mr. Goodale’s news conference was immediately followed by Charlie Angus, the NDP’s culture and heritage critic, who voiced similar criticism on the handling of the census.Mr. Angus said the prime minister should take the reins from Mr. Clement and take action on the file before more harm is done, adding that Mr. Clement doesn’t have “a fig leaf of credibility to hide behind.”“If this is a government of grown-ups, they have to be able to come back to the Canadian people and say, at least once, ‘You know, we really blew it,’” Angus said, adding Canadians likely wouldn’t mind if Stephen Harper said “‘Hey guys, we didn’t really think this one through.’”“But their response is always . . . to stonewall until they panic and they throw as much muck on something as they can and that’s not going to work.The Tories have called for a meeting of the industry, science and technology committee to discuss the census changes, a call that came days after the Liberals said they would do the same and force the Conservatives to explain their actions.That meeting is scheduled to take place on July 27.Bloc Quebecois MP Robert Bouchard issued a statement Thursday, saying: “It is essential that (Sheikh) has the occasion to expose his vision of the facts in front of the committee.”Critics say a voluntary survey could produce a skewed and unreliable national demographic portrait, while the Tories maintain that a sufficient sample size will yield accurate results and minimize the invasion of Canadians’ privacy.Previously, 20% of Canadians households received the mandatory long-form census every five years, providing information on issues such as ethnicity, education, employment and disability. That questionnaire will now be replaced with the voluntary National Household Survey and sent to one-third of households.Bank of Canada governor Mark Carney also weighed in on the issue when speaking to reporters Thursday.Describing Statistics Canada as one of the world’s “pre-eminent” data-collection organizations, Carney said the impact of the census changes on the national bank are not immediately known.“We will look at the impact of any changes on the quality or reliability of data we use and act accordingly,” he said.“We do not use the raw data, per se, from the long form . . . We will have to evaluate, in the fullness of time along with Statistics Canada, the impact that any proposed change would have on the reliability and quality of data.”