OTTAWA — The two key players in the political drama surrounding the census controversy have been called before the House of Commons Industry, Science and Technology committee next week.On Tuesday, the committee wants to quiz Industry Minister Tony Clement, whose decision to scrap the long-form census prompted a fierce backlash, and Munir Sheikh, the country’s chief statistician who resigned as head of Statistics Canada.The government’s move to scrap the mandatory long-form census in 2011 in favour of a voluntary one has prompted criticism from a broad range of groups who say it will produce a skewed body of data that will compromise the ability of policy-makers to make evidence-based decisions. Despite the calls from municipalities, provincial governments, statisticians, academic bodies, economists and researchers from many disciplines to reverse his decision, Mr. Clement has shown no signs of backing down. He and other Conservative MPs argue that the questions asked on the long-form census are too intrusive and that Canadians should not be forced to answer them under threat of facing a fine or jail time. While Canada’s privacy commissioner has only fielded a handful of complaints about the census in the last decade, the Tories say they’ve heard from upset constituents.With the controversy showing no sign of abating, some are questioning the Conservative’s political wisdom in not backing down.Tom Flanagan, a former chief of staff to Prime Minister Stephen Harper who has a long history with the Reform, Canadian Alliance and Conservative parties, is among those puzzled by the government’s motivation behind the census decision.“It’s just never been an issue in the Conservative movement,” he said in an interview. “It just literally comes out of nowhere as far as I can see.”Mr. Flanagan, a political scientist at the University of Calgary, said while some of the privacy concerns may be legitimate, the way the Conservatives have handled this is completely misguided.“I think it was an exercise in bad government to suddenly spring this on the public without any previous discussion, no consultation at all,” he said. “You don’t deal with the public that way in a democracy.”Mr. Flanagan and others predict the Conservatives will alienate more supporters than they will appease with the decision.“They are alienating a lot of people who have supported the government and would like to continue supporting the government, people who are fundamentally Conservatives but see this as just bad government,” said Mr. Flanagan. “It’s not clear to me what they’re going to pick up from this politically and they’re irritating a lot of people who would like to be their friends.”Ned Franks, an emeritus professor and parliamentary expert from Queen’s University, suspects the Tories did not anticipate such an adverse reaction, but agrees that they’ve put support from swing voters in particular at risk.“I have a strong feeling that as this plays out it will not help the government,” he said, noting this is not the only occasion where the use of statistics has been caught up in the policy agenda of the Conservatives. “Crime rates keep going down and yet they want to get tougher on crime,” Mr. Franks said in an interview. “The government is appealing to its base on the sentiment that you should be tough on criminals but there is no evidence . . . that putting more people in prisons actually reduces crime rates.”The Tories have been accused of pandering to “fringe”supporters within the Conservative base and attempting to shrink the role of government in people’s lives.