OTTAWA — The federal government will ignore the motion passed Wednesday night calling on it to reinstate the mandatory long-form census and is still preparing its own legislation to remove the threat of jail for compulsory surveys, something the opposition motion also called on the government to do. The NDP and Bloc Quebecois supported a Liberal motion on the census and together the opposition parties passed it 152 to 141.The motion is not binding on the government and at every opportunity the Conservatives have shot down the idea of reviving the long version of the census despite the outcry from dozens of groups, including provincial and municipal governments, statisticians, economists, health and social services organizations. The critics say the long-form’s replacement, the new national household survey, will not provide reliable data because it won’t capture a representative sample of Canadians since it will be voluntary to fill out. It is mandatory for Canadians to complete the census, and if they don’t, they are subject to jail or a fine of up to $500 according to the Statistics Act. The Conservatives scrapped the long version of it, which used to be sent to about 20% of households, because they believe it contained intrusive questions that people shouldn’t be forced to answer under threat of a fine or jail. The jail penalty has never been enforced. But as the controversy unfolded over the summer, the Conservatives were in an awkward position because Canadians are still threatened with jail for not answering the short census and other mandatory surveys such as the agricultural survey.On Aug. 11, Industry Minister Tony Clement announced the government would eliminate the jail penalty totally. The Conservatives have not yet moved on that promise. Parliament only began its fall session Sept. 20 but it’s been weeks since they announced their intention to amend the Statistics Act and a new bill is not ready to go, Mr. Clement indicated Wednesday.He said the government would introduce a bill, “When we’ve drafted it and we’re comfortable with it.”The Liberals, in addition to their motion, have prepared a private member’s bill that seeks to reinstate the long census and revokes the jail penalty for failing to answer it. The opposition doesn’t know yet when it will be able to table the bill.All parties are on side with taking the jail penalty out of the legislation, but the opposition and government are still miles apart on bringing the mandatory long-form census back. In question period Wednesday, Prime Minister Stephen Harper didn’t back down and said Canadians will be encouraged to fill out the national household survey. “We will treat the public like adults. That is how we are going to conduct business in this country,” he said.The government argues that it is striking a fair balance between the need for data — which are used by many stakeholders in policy development — and protecting privacy.The provincial governments in Ontario and Quebec have strongly voiced their opposition to the census changes but their efforts to have the government reverse course have failed and their pleas failed to resonate with Mr. Clement again Wednesday.“We always listen to the provinces but we also have a duty and responsibility to listen to Canadians,” he said. “I understand their position, it’s just not in my view a fair and reasonable position.”Liberal leader Michael Ignatieff accused Mr. Harper Wednesday of being stubborn and said he should show leadership by admitting he made a mistake.