August 24, 2009
Categories:
Obama
Report: Arizona Rep. considering birther lawsuit UPDATE
Taking the birther thing to a new level, archconservative Rep. Trent Franks (R-Ariz.) is considering filing a lawsuit to put President Obama on the spot over his birth documents, according to a Mohave Daily News readout of a Franks town hall over the weekend.
Oh, yeah, and Franks apparently didn't object when an audience member suggested Obama &amp;quot;denounced&amp;quot; the U.S. as a Christian nation during an overseas trip, which never happened.
UPDATE: Franks' spokeswoman says the congressman was considering filing the suit prior to the '08 campaign&amp;nbsp;&amp;mdash; but thinks a string of recent rulings against the birther cause in court has rendered future legal action &amp;quot;moot.&amp;quot;
MDN's Jim Seckler:
The other main issue dealt with numerous speakers questioning Obama's birth certificate and why there wasn't an investigation into whether he is a naturalized citizen. One woman said a newspaper announcement of his birth in Hawaii was not sufficient. Another asked how he could have a passport without a birth certificate.
Franks said there was not enough evidence that Obama is not an American citizen. He did say there was a lot of conflicting evidence of Obama's citizenship and that he was considering filing a lawsuit, the only congressman to do so. Franks asked why the president did not simply produce a birth certificate.
One speaker, a pre-school teacher, tearfully said Obama denounced the country as a Christian nation and warned he should learn a civics lesson. Franks agreed with her saying he was offended that Obama denigrated the country on an overseas trip and the president should speak in favor of the country when abroad.
Context: Franks, is a global warming skeptic, pal of Focus on the Family founder James Dobson and served as a high-ranking aide to former Arizona Gov. Evan Mecham, who was removed from office and canceled the state's Martin Luther King Jr. holiday while Franks was on the payroll.
A similar suit has already been dismissed by the 10th Circuit Court of Appeals.