OTTAWA — Canadians are afraid to fly and some are considering cancelling their summer vacations over concerns about airline security screening, according to Shelly Glover, one of the Conservative MPs who pushed for Tuesday’s special meeting of Parliament’s public safety committee.A dozen MPs have been called back to Ottawa from their constituencies to debate whether to undertake a study on the “reported failure to confirm the identities of passengers travelling by air.”The request, made by Conservative MPs on the committee, comes after a controversial video was posted on YouTube that alleges women wearing niqabs passed through a boarding gate at a Montreal airport, faces covered, without having their identities verified.“We’re in vacation period right now. Canadians are wanting to travel not only in the country but outside of the country and so when I heard from Canadians who are thinking they are not going to go on vacation because of this, we need to do something for them right now,” Ms. Glover said in an interview Monday.John Baird, who was transport minister when the story about the video emerged but was shifted to Conservative House leader in a mini-cabinet shuffle Friday, ordered his officials to look into the alleged incident. Airports and airline carriers were also sent a reminder that photo ID is required to match the people boarding planes with the passenger list. Mr. Baird also said that in his 19 months as transport minister he had never heard of some passengers going unchecked at boarding gates.But Ms. Glover said she doesn’t want to wait for the results of the probe by Transport Canada, and that the public safety committee needs to examine immediately whether it’s really a widespread problem, as she says some reports have indicated.“I’d like to make sure that all airlines are using the same consistent security measures to ensure that people are being identified and it’s only in this way, I think, that we will be able to alleviate the fears that Canadians have now about air travel.”Opposition MPs, however, say convening the committee based on a video that was shot by another passenger, includes music and commentary saying security is required “except for Muslims” and doesn’t clearly show possible security actions before or after the edited clip, is unwarranted.“We’re not even certain there is a problem, all we have is a YouTube video,” said Liberal MP Mark Holland. “I don’t really know what the purpose of the meeting is other than to try to get people scared about a non-existent issue.”Tuesday will be the second summer meeting of the public safety committee. It also met on July 12 when the Opposition requested a study on the security issues surrounding the G8 and G20 summits but that meeting ended with no vote called because time ran out, and the Conservatives were accused of filibustering.Mr. Holland still wants more hearings on the summits, which saw hundreds of Canadians arrested and violent demonstrations, and says there are other more pressing issues for the committee to study than a “dubious” video.“I think it’s a channel changer,” Mr. Holland said. “Ithink this is all about them being in political hot water.”For the last month the Conservatives have been hammered over their decision to cancel the mandatory long-form census.But Ms. Glover insists the concerns over whether some passengers are going unchecked when boarding planes go beyond just the YouTube video. The Manitoba MP cited media reports that included interviews with airline employees who said the rules are often not followed and she said she’s personally been approached by airline staff while in airports about security checks being inconsistent.She said Canadians “are very much fearful,” and she wants to ensure everything possible is being done to ensure they feel secure.“If there’s even one Canadian who is afraid to travel because they’re not secure in the fact that security measures are being followed consistently and equally then this is a public safety issue. This is a national security issue,” she said.