OTTAWA - A coalition representing a broad range of interests has filed
a new court challenge to the federal government's decision to scrap
the mandatory, long-form census.
The Canadian Council on Social Development is spearheading the case in
Federal Court to defend what it calls "the equal right of all
Canadians to be counted."
The Conservative government announced last spring it would do away
with the mandatory, long-form census, claiming it was an unjustifiable
imposition on privacy.
Its decision to replace it with a voluntary questionnaire has been
widely panned by experts and others who say an optional survey would
be inaccurate and unreliable.
The 90-year-old council says it's "responding to the overwhelming and
very real concerns about the consequences of this catastrophic
decision."
Papers were filed with the court on Thursday and no dates have been
set for hearings.
The council is joined in its challenge by a dozen social, community
and legal organizations.
"Just over 100 days have passed since the Harper government launched
its assault on Canada's fundamental data source with a sneak attack on
the long-form census," said a group statement.
"The most reliable, comprehensive source of information — relied on as
a tool to respond to the needs and priorities of every Canadian —
wiped out, against the advice of experts across the country and
abroad, on a political whim."
The council says Canadians' response to the decision has been
unequivocal: "Why would the government shut down Canada's navigation
system?"
Despite an outcry from more than 370 organizations and "tens of
thousands of Canadians," the government refuses to reconsider its
decision.
"While the decision remains unchanged, this battle is far from over,"
the group said, adding that despite "misinformation" from the
Conservative government, the decision can be changed well into 2011.
"It's not over until the surveys hit our mail boxes."
A previous attempt at overturning the decision through the Federal
Court failed earlier this month.
A francophone group lost its legal challenge on Oct. 6, when its
application for a judicial review of the government's decision was
rejected.
The federation had argued that replacing the mandatory long-form
census with a voluntary survey would yield less reliable information
about francophone minority communities, and thus hamper the
government's ability to fulfil its obligations under the Official
Languages Act.
Judge Richard Boivin said the Official Languages Act does not mandate
which tools the government must use when supporting and serving
linguistic minorities.
Boivin backed the government's argument that it is too early to pass
judgment on the usefulness of the voluntary survey.
Industry Minister Tony Clement has emphasized that measures will be
taken to ensure as many Canadians as possible fill out the survey, to
increase the reliability of the information.
The government argues that it has struck a balance between the need
for data and concerns expressed by some Canadians that the census
process was too invasive and unnecessarily coercive.
The Canadian Press, 2010
Click here to buy text ads on Breitbart
Show Comments / Post Comments