The chief economist of the Fraser Institute supports the Conservative government’s decision to scrap the long-form mandatory census, saying voluntary surveys will yield enough accurate information about the country and critics saying otherwise are “vested interest groups.”“I think that Canadians ought to have a very sober second look at the mandatory long-form census and really ask themselves whether or not we should be forcing Canadians to answer what I consider to be very private questions,” Niels Veldhuis, senior economist with the conservative think-tank, said in an interview. “These questions are things that I don’t believe the government has any business or authority forcing Canadians to answer.”Mr. Veldhuis said the public criticism of the decision, which will see the 2011 long-form census eradicated and replaced with a voluntary survey, was not unexpected and is coming from academics, economists and other social scientists who represent a “vested interest group” seeking to maintain their own access to the data.“I certainly understand that social scientists, and I’m one of them, like to play with data, they like to analyze social trends and economic trends, but the reality here is there really is no good basis for collecting this information. It’s a cheap way for academics and social scientists to get information that I believe should be acquired using voluntary means.”Mr. Veldhuis’s position stands out amid a growing chorus of opposition to the decision, which critics have said will erode the country’s statistical background and hamper the work of governments, community groups, non-profits and researchers. He said the census in its previous form is “by no means a complete analysis” and there are “serious problems with compliance,” with some groups, such as aboriginals, left out or under-represented.Statistics Canada is no longer allowed to grant interviews but is responding to all media inquiries by email only, and the agency declined to comment on Mr. Veldhuis’s statements.The Fraser Institute uses long-form data in its school report card rankings, Mr. Veldhuis said, but he believes the short-form census — which will remain mandatory — the voluntary census and other polling, market research and voluntary surveys conducted by private companies will provide more than enough data on Canadians. The think-tank recently conducted a survey asking people about their tax returns, he said, and they used short-form census data to ensure they had even geographical distribution across Canada. When asked how they would ensure even representation across different income and ethnic groups on such surveys without reliable long-form data, Veldhuis questioned why those differences would matter.“This is what should be worrying average Canadians — this information is used by central planners to plan how to tinker with the lives of Canadians,” he said of the ways in which census data is used.The Conservatives have said they scrapped the long-form census because of complaints that it was invasive. A comprehensive report fromStatistics Canada detailing response to the 2006 census, however, contained no mention of privacy complaints, and Canada’s privacy commissioner has received just three complaints about the census in the last decade, none of which was upheld.At news conference in Ottawa on Friday, Industry Minister Tony Clement, who oversees Statistics Canada, said there were citizens who objected to the census on privacy grounds, but those complaints flew under the radar because “maybe they don’t have access to the mainstream media or maybe they’re not media-savvy.”He said he approached Statistics Canada as the experts and asked for some options that would provide the data used by a wide range of organizations while still allowing people with a “conscientious objection” to the census to opt out.“StatsCan gave me three options, each of which they thought would work,” Mr. Clement said. “I chose one of those options with their recommendation. I asked StatsCan, ‘if I accept the ad campaign, the increased sample size, will this give us robust data?’ They have answered me in no uncertain terms, yes, it will give us the data that everyone hankers for.” Mr. Clement conceded that there has been public opposition to the census change, but questioned why critics of the government’s decision didn’t trust the expertise of Statistics Canada in signing off on the change. Statistics Canada officials have said repeatedly that their role is to provide options for the government to consider, but that the final decision on changes to the census rests with cabinet and not the agency.