Posted at  9:38 AM ET, 12/ 5/2010
Redskins still in playoff hunt, but not TCU
By
Joel Achenbach
Digressing momentarily from the b--k project, I see in this morning's sports section that Boise State, which is a missed chipped-shot field goal away from having a perfect record, may get a spot in either the MAACO Bowl in Las Vegas or the Fight Hunger Bowl in San Francisco.
I am sure that both of these bowls are considered highly prestigious, particularly among employees of MAACO, an institution, or association, or facility, with which I am currently unfamiliar but will I am certain I will learn much more about in the exceedingly unlikely event that I witness the aforesaid MAACO Bowl and sit through commercials espousing the virtues of MAACO appliances, or MAACO automatic transmission services, or MAACO yard implements, or whatnot.
And who could object to the Fight Hunger Bowl? Other than, you know, the pro-hunger people, like the guy who runs North Korea.
I am sure the athletes at Boise State will intellectually support the purpose of the Fight Hunger Bowl, and would also be happy to attend the Imagine World Peace Bowl (this year held in Marin County) and the Perform Random Acts of Kindness Bowl (Palo Alto).
That said, there's one painful fact these players must face: The "meaningful" part of their season -- as defined, perhaps a bit ruthlessly, by sports fans nationally -- is over.
That doesn't mean they can't play for pride! Same goes for TCU, which has a record of, let's see, 12-0. Almost good enough! But not good enough to ensure that the "meaningful" part of TCU's season will continue. The simple fact is that TCU has been eliminated from the quest for a national championship.
So has Wisconsin, at 11-1, despite routinely scoring 80 points a game.
So have Ohio State and Michigan State, also at 11-1, and Virginia Tech, which hasn't lost since early September and just won the Atlantic Coast Conference title. Anyone out there hungry to play Tech right now? I don't think so. They could be the best team in the country, but they're out of contention because early in the season they lost to Boise State and then James Madison, and might well have lost to Mary Washington or Sweetbrier had they not gotten their act together.
All these good teams have been eliminated from the title hunt because President Obama has failed to deliver on his promise to create a college football playoff. Instead there is this wacky BCS thing that decides, here on Dec. 5, that all the games still to be played by all these teams in all these various bowls are meaningless, except for the Jan. 10 (!!!!!!!!!!!!) championship game between Auburn and Oregon.
That is ridiculous. Heck, the Redskins are still in the hunt at 5-6!!! If the Redskins can still be mentioned, theoretically if not plausibly, as playoff contenders, and thus can still carry some Vegas odds to win the Super Bowl, then why can't an undefeated TCU team play its way toward a title game?
I will confess that my position on this has evolved somewhat over the years. I used to be comfortable with the uncertainty and chaos of college football's final rankings under the system in which the AP and the UPI (or, later, ESPN, etc.) would determine the national champion. Sometimes there would be a split decision. People would holler. People would stamp their feet. But the uncertainty of the poll-driven championship reflected the reality that there wasn't a championship game, there were no playoffs, and there really was no way to say, with any degree of confidence, that Southern Cal was truly better than Alabama since they hadn't played each other.
But now the BCS poses as something more conclusive than it really is. There is a single championship game -- but no playoff. We are supposed to praise the champion without feeling with any confidence that this is truly the best team.
Admittedly, I hate Auburn. Hating Auburn is part of my heritage. I remember ancient pains. I remember scores run up, and evil perpetrated. The very name, "Auburn," causes me to flinch, just like hearing the word "Beelzebub."
Complicating matters is that I also feel like I need to pull for the conference in the title game. This is going to be agonizing. "Do it for the conference," my brother will say. I don't know. I may have to do some heavy compartmentalization. I got nothing against the Ducks. Don't know nothin' bout them Ducks, to be honest. How much does their quarterback make? Someone give me a fill.
2010
12
05
09
38