The Canadian Press
OTTAWA - The Speaker of the House of Commons has rejected an NDP
request for an emergency debate on the cancellation of the mandatory
long census.
Peter Milliken says the request from NDP Leader Jack Layton doesn't
meet the requirements for such a debate.
He says if the NDP wants to debate the census decision, it can bring
it up at the next day set aside for matters raised by opposition
parties.
Layton argues it's not too late to reverse the government's decision
to replace the mandatory long form with a voluntary version.
Even if the debate didn't change anything, he says, it would force the
government to discuss its decision.
He says it's a way to pressure an intransigent government.
If the long-form census is lost, Layton said, ''there will be
irreversible damage to Canada's vital, statistical resources.''
The Conservatives quietly decided in June to scrap the mandatory long
census and replace it with a voluntary version. They argued that the
long form probed too deeply into the private lives of Canadians and
threatened them with jail for refusing to answer the questions.
"Our approach is a very fair and reasonable one," Industry Minister
Tony Clement told the Commons on Monday. "We want to find a better
balance between gathering the necessary data and Canadians' right to
privacy."
But the move was met with vigorous opposition from a wide array of
professional organizations, minority-rights advocates, provincial and
municipal governments as well as opposition politicians. They say the
replacement voluntary survey won't produce reliable results,
especially when it comes to understanding small communities and
minority populations.
Most recently, Bank of Canada Governor Mark Carney said the quality of
some of the bank's economic research would be hurt by the lack of
solid data.
The replacement voluntary survey has already been sent to the printers
and the civil servant in charge of the 2011 census has said it's too
late to bring back the mandatory form.
But former chief statistician Ivan Fellegi said Ottawa could postpone
the whole census to September 2011 from May, gaining a few extra
months to re-establish the long census.
The Canadian Press, 2010
Click here to buy text ads on Breitbart
Show Comments / Post Comments